WELCOME CITIZENS OF SCIOLY, to my Astro notes.​ I apologize for their
handwritten­ness. I find that writing notes out makes them a lot easier to remember than simply
copying­and­pasting them from Wikipedia. But hey, maybe the illegibility of my handwriting will
encourage you to re­write them!
Also… I really hate reading through pages of tiny text looking for a specific sentence,
especially when the question deals with a process(star formation, for example). I much prefer looking
at a visual, so my binder­making process consists mainly of condensing several articles into one
(mostly) easy­to­read illustratration. I get the feeling that it isn’t a common technique for astronomy
notetaking, so I included a lot my notes(especially ones on stellar evolution) that are in drawing form.
I also included a few comments on DSO’s and my formula collection for the math section. The
last thing in these notes is a list of definitions. The ones where the question asks “what is the name of
the empirical function that relates the velocity dispersion and luminosity of a galaxy?” And then it
gives you five options, none of which you’ve heard of… I started making this list last year and thought
I’d share it.
Anyways, enough of my rambling, here’s my notes:

Contents:
Stellar Evolution
Overview
Star/Planet Formation
Late evolution­­Low Mass
Late evolution­­Intermediate Mass
Late evolution­­High Mass
Stellar Structure
Degeneracy
Masses and limits
Supernovae
SN classification(by spectra and light curves)
Type Ia Scenarios
Type Ia Application
DSO’s
Organization strategy
Math
Constants/Formulas/Derivations
Why can’t we go the speed of light?
Notes
Definition
Star types

Stellar Evolution
Overview

Star/planet formation
This diagram shows the formation of a relatively low mass star(<2 solar masses). 2­8 solar
masses stars become Ae/Be Herbig star instead of T­Tauris, and the process is largely unknown for
even more massive stars. The process of star formation is likely to be very similar regardless of
mass, though the timing would vary greatly.

Late evolution­­Low Mass
Because very low mass stars(usually red dwarfs) are fully convective, fused helium is
distributed throughout the entire star, instead of piling up in the core. A degenerate helium core is
never created, so the star never becomes a red giant. Instead the star directly becomes a helium
white dwarf once all the hydrogen fuel has been exhausted. Because of the trillion­year lifespan of
these stars, this process has not been observed.

Late evolution­­ Intermediate Mass

Late evolution­­High Mass

Stellar Structure

Nuclear Processes

Degeneracy

Masses and limits

Supernovae
SN Classification

Type Ia Scenarios

Supernova Application
Because all Type Ia supernova explode when the white dwarf reaches 1.44 solar masses, they
all have the same energy output, therefore the same absolute magnitude. This makes them great
standard candles; astronomers use them to measure intergalactic distances, when parallax and
Cepheid variables no longer work. Distance calculations for supernovae provided the first direct
evidence of dark energy. Below are some example of finding distance with Ia supernovae.

DSO’s
Organization strategy
I haven’t started working on DSO notes yet, and I doubt I will until this year’s are announced. However,
I just wanted to share my organization strategy as I found it to be very effective. I organized all the DSO’s on a
chart, along with their discoverer, discovery method, distance to Earth, age, composition… pretty much every
detail I could find. Also, I had a column for both pictures and graphs (although really I should have had one for
artist’s impressions and actual data).
I found this chart to be extremely effective because I ​hate leafing through pages of text looking for the
right line. This way, when I was asked “what exoplanet was discovered in 1995, and what was its
significance?” I just had to go down the discovery date column until I found 1995. Oh that’s 51 Pegasi b, and
looking at the significance column, it was the first planet discovered around a sunlike star.
Below I have half the chart so you can see what kind of stuff I put on it and decide whether you like it. It
is sideways though, but I figured you won’t actually want to use the info from last year on it.

Math
Formulas/Derivations
I had a very hard time finding a good list of formulas last year(I did, however, find one full of typos so
look out for that one). Here’s all the formulas I could find, along with derivations(for Kepler’s Laws and
other orbital mechanics). They’re handwritten though(adding symbols is a nightmare) so no
copying­and­pasting. Unfortunately, you will either have to rewrite or type them.

Planet­related questions​ will likely not be on this year’s test. However, many of these
formulas describe binary systems in general; because Type Ia supernovae result from binary
systems, they might be applicable anyway.

Why can’t we go the speed of light?
This is not directly related to astro, but I thought I’d mention it anyway. I hear this
misconception all the time: “It’s not that we can’t go faster than the speed of light, it’s just that we
haven’t figured out how yet.” Grrr. So I’ve included this visual(ha! Who would’ve guessed that!) proof.
I saw it on the minutephysics YouTube channel if you want to go watch that.

Notes
Here’s some alphabetical lists with brief descriptions/definitions that you might encounter.

Definitions
Ambipolar DIffusion​­­the diffusion of positively and negatively charged particles via their interactions with a
magnetic field.
Baade Wesselink Method​­­for calculating properties of Cepheids.
Chandrasekhar Limit​­­the amount of mass a white dwarf can have before a 1a SN(the upper limit to an
electron degenerate object). Accepted to be 1.44 solar masses.
Coulomb Barrier​­­the energy barrier that 2 atomic nuclei must overcome to fuse. Governs the volume of
planets.
Degenerate Matter​­­Matter at such a high density its pressure is independent of temperature.
Eddington Limit​­­the maximum luminosity an object can have while maintaining a balance between outward
radiation and inward gravitational force (hydrostatic equilibrium).
Electron Degeneracy Pressure​­­results because electrons resist being too close to each other.
Faber­Jackson Relation​­­an empirical function that relates the velocity dispersion and the luminosity of a
galaxy, used to determine distance.
Gamow Peak​­­the product of Maxwellian distribution and tunneling rate under which fusion is most likely to
occur.
Hawking Radiation​­­theoretical electromagnetic radiation emitted by black holes.
Hill Sphere​­­​also called “Roche Sphere” The region where an object dominates the attraction of satellites.
Humphreys­Davidson Limit​­­upper stellar luminosity limit.
Hydrodynamic Escape​­­when the atmosphere of a gas giant is stripped away by its star.
Ideal Gas Law​­­Function that relates a gas’s volume, pressure, temperature, and quantity.
Initial Mass Function​­­an empirical function that describes the distribution of initial mass for a population of
stars (a histogram for star populations).
Jeans Mass​­­the amount of mass needed for a dust cloud to collapse into a star.
Kappa Mechanism­­​the driving mechanism behind the changes in luminosity in pulsating variables. Greek
letter Kappa is used to indicate radiative opacity.
Kelvin Helmholtz Mechanism​­­the process that occurs when the surface of a star or planet drops. THe
cooling causes the pressure to drop, resulting in the object shrinking. THis raises the pressure in the core,
heating up the object.
Kirchhoff’s Law​­­A hot dense gas produces a continuous spectrum without dark lines; a hot diffuse gas
produces emission lines; a cool diffuse gas produces dark absorption lines when placed in front of a
continuous spectrum.
Kozai Mechanism​­­the periodic exchange of an object’s orbit’s inclination and eccentricity.
Nebular Hypothesis​­­the theory that our solar system formed from a nebula.
Neutron Degeneracy Pressure​­­results because neutrons resist being too close to each other.
(O­C) Method​­­”Observed minus Calculated” method, used to determine changes in the period of a variable
star.
Olber’s Paradox​­­If the universe is truly infinite, the entire sky should be filled with light.
Pauli Exclusion Principle​­­no two electrons in an atom can be in the same configurations at the same time.
Applies to all fermions, but not to bosons.
Poynting­Robertson Drag​­­solar radiation causes dust to lose angular momentum, causing it to spiral
towards the star.
Rayleigh Scattering​­­scattering of light in a medium. Causes the sky to be blue and sunsets to be red.
Roche Limit​­­the distance within which an object will disintegrate due to another object’s tidal forces
overcoming its own gravity.

Roche Lobe​­­the tear­drop shaped area around a binary star where the material is gravitationally bound to it.
Roche Limit​­­​See “Hill Sphere”
Rossiter­McLaughlin Effect​­­When an exoplanet transits, the star rotates on its axis, created a small red and
blue shift of its atmosphere that can be detected.
Rydberg Formula​­­gives energy differences between levels in Bohr Model.
Schonberg­Chandrasekhar Limit​­­the maximum mass of a non­fusing, isothermic core that can support an
enclosing envelope.
Schwartzschild Radius​­­the radius something must be compressed to to form a black hole (for the escape
velocity to become the speed of light)
Stefan­Boltzmann Law​­­describes the power radiated from a black body in terms of its temp.
Stromgen Radius​­­the size of an HII region.
Sudarsky Classes​­­a system of classifying gas giant planets.
Tolman­Oppenheimer­Volkoff Limit​­­upper mass limit for neutron stars (or any neutron degenerate object).
Tulley­Fischer Relation​­­a technique that uses the rotational velocity of a galaxy to determine distance.
Virial Theorem​­­for a stable, self­gravitating, spherically distributed object (stars, galaxies, etc.) the kinetic
energy must equal the potential energy within a factor of 2.
Vogt­Russell Theorem​­­the structure of a star depends only on its mass and the distribution of chemical
elements in its interior.
Wien’s Law​­­energy emitted by objects of different temperature will peak at different wavelengths. The hotter
the object, the shorter and bluer the wavelength.

Star types
Ae/Be Herbig—​More massive analog of T Tauri. A young star 2­8 M.
Alpha Cygni—​Variable B or A supergiant w/ non­radial pulsations. Prototype is Deneb.
AM Canum Venaticorum—​Rare type of cataclysmic variable, where WD accretes hydrogen­poor matter from
donor star (helium WD, low­mass helium star, or evolved MS star).
AM Herculis—​see “polars”
Beta Cephei(Beta Canis Majoris)—​Class B stars with small rapid variations in brightness due to pulsations of
star’s surface. Pulsations driven by kappa mechanism and p­mode pulsations.
BY Draconis—​K or M MS variables. Quasiperiodic variations due to rotation of star and star spots.
Cataclysmic variable(CV)​­­Stars with occasional violent outbursts due to thermonuclear processes. Many are
close binary systems.
Cepheid (anomalous)­­​Pulsating variable on the instability strip, similar to RR Lyrae but with higher
luminosities.
Cepheid (classical)­­​A pulsating Population I giants and supergiants whose luminosity and pulsation period
are related.
Cepheid (double­mode)­­​Cepheid that pulsates in two modes at the same time, usually the fundamental and
first overtone.
Cepheid (type II)­­​Population II Cepheids.
Delta Celphei­­​see “classical cepheids.”
Delta Scuti­­​Also known as “Dwarf Cepheids.” Class A stars on or near the main sequence at the lower end of
the instability strip.
DQ Herculis­­​see “intermediate polars.”
Dwarf Nova​­­Close binary system with a WD, red dwarf, and accretion disk. Variations are caused by
instabilities in the disk.
Eruption Variable​­­Varies due to violent processes and flares in its chromosphere and coronae.
FK Comae Berenices
FS Canis Majoris—​Eruptive variable star. Likely in binary system w/ mass exchange. Consists of B MS star in
dust envelope.

FU Orionis­­​A pre main sequence star that experiences dramatic change in magnitude and spectral type due
to abrupt mass transfer from accretion disk onto star.
Gamma Cassiopeiae­­​also known as “shell star.” An eruptive variable with a spectrum that suggests a
circumstellar disk of gas. Irregular variations are due to outflow of matter.
Gamma Doradus­­​Stars that vary due to non­radial pulsations of their surface. Typically young F or late A
main sequence stars.
Irregular Variables­­​Pulsating variables with little or no periodicity. Includes most red giants.
Lambda Eridani­­​Be stars with very regular variations due to either non­radial pulsations, inhomogeneous
rotating discs, or the rotation of the star itself.
Luminous Blue Variable­­​also known as “S Doradus.” Massive evolved stars that show unpredictable and
sometimes dramatic variations in both their spectra and their brightness.
Microquasar­­​A smaller cousin of the quasar, sharing the same characteristics, strong and variable radio
emission, often resolvable as a pair of radio jets, and an accretion disk surrounding a compact object which is
either a black hole or a neutron star.
Mira­­​Pulsating red giants on AGB.
Novae­­​Close binary systems with an accreting WD and low­mass MS star.
Polars—​Highly magnetic type of CV binary system, that produces polarized light. System contains accreting
WD and low­mass donor star(usually red dwarf), with synchronous rotation (tidal locking).
Polar (intermediate)­­​Type of CV binary system where the accretion disk is disrupted by the WD’s magnetic
field. Infalling matter follow the magnetic field in accretion streams.
PV Telescopii­­​Hydrogen­deficient, helium supergiants.
R Coronae Borealis­­​Rare luminous, hydrogen­poor, carbon­rich supergiant that spend of the time at max
brightness, fading at irregular intervals.
Recurrent Novae­­​Similar to novae, but with two or more smaller outbursts in recorded history.
RR Lyrae­­​Short period pulsating giants, usually class A. Older and less massive than Cepheids.
RS Canum Venaticorum​­­Close binary system with active chromospheres that cause large stellar spots.
RV Tauri​­­Yellow supergiants whose light variation alternates between deep and shallow.
S Doradus­­​see “Luminous Blue Supergiant.”
Semiregular variable​­­Giants and supergiants with periodicity and intervals of irregular variation.
SS Cygni­­​prototype for “dwarf nova.”
SU Ursae Majoris​­­Two distinct kinds of outbursts: one faint, frequent, and short; the other is bright, less
frequent, and longer. Physically similar to U Gem stars.
SW Sextantis­­​A CV where the emission lines of hydrogen and helium are not doubled.
SX Arietis­­​B type main sequence variables that exhibits strong magnetic fields and intense He I and Si III
spectral lines.
SX Phoenicis­­​Cousin to Delta Scuti, pulsating A­F type with low metallicity.
Symbiotic Binary System​­­Close binary with a red giant and a hot blue star, both embedded in nebulosity,
that shows semi­periodic, nova­like outbursts.
T Tauri­­​young star <2 M.
U Geminorum​­­Suddenly brightens after intervals of quiescence at minimum light.
Wolf­Rayet­­​Evolved, massive stars that have completely lost their outer hydrogen and are fusing helium or
heavier elements in the core. Spectrum indicates high surface temperature, surface enhancement of heavy
elements, and strong stellar winds.
W Ursae Majoris­­​also known as “low­mass contact binary.” Type of eclipsing binary variable star. These stars
are close binaries of spectral types F, G, or K that share a common envelope of material and are thus in contact with
one another.
Z Andromedae­­​prototype for “symbiotic variable.”
Z Camelopardalis​­­Shows cyclic variations interrupted by intervals of constant brightness called “standstills.”
Physically similar to U Gem stars.

