Debris Disk

Mark Wyatt's group at the IoA carries out a range of observational and
theoretical debris disk related research. Debris disks are the disks of
planetesimals and dust found around many nearby main sequence
stars. The Solar System has its own debris disk: the asteroid and
Kuiper belts, as well as the dust produced in collisions and sublimation
of these objects. This dust is visible with the naked eye from the Earth
as the zodiacal light; debris also collides with the Earth creating
meteor showers, extinctions, and may have delivered much of our
water. As well as the analogous implications for the habitability of
extrasolar planetary systems, studying the debris disks of nearby stars
provides vital clues to the outcome of planet formation processes.
Many nearby disks can be imaged, and by studying such images it is
possible to pinpoint the presence of unseen planets, and to ascertain
their evolutionary history, from the effect of the planets' gravity on the
disks. Accurate characterisation of the level of dust present around
nearby stars is also an essential step on the quest to find Earth-like
planets, for which such dust can be both a hindrance and a help.

Debris Disk Observations



Our observational work currently focuses on an unbiased survey of a
sample that covers the nearest ~500 stars (or rather the nearest ~100
of each spectral type A,F,G,K,M). Read more.

Debris Disk Theory
Comparison with observations of the structure of debris disks, and of
how the level of dust emission varies with age, as well as other stellar
parameters, provide vital tests of the models. Read more.

Post-Main Sequence Debris Disks
Although debris discs around main sequence stars are relatively well
understood, very little is known about what happens to these systems
as the star evolves. Read more.

Solar System
The Solar System hosts a debris disk, comprising primarily the
Asteroid and Edgeworth-Kuiper belts, but with other important
components such as the Zodiacal cloud, irregular satellites, and
trojans. Read more.

Planetary System Dynamics
Nearly all work on planetary systems requires an understanding of how
planets and smaller bodies move under the gravitational influence of
the host star(s) and each other.