SSSS 2016
Magikarpmaster629’s Notes:

Introduction to Astronomy

*Note: The following guide and the event Astronomy require knowledge of basic Algebra and
Trigonometry. These will not be addressed, so if you are not familiar with these concepts consult
another source.

Lesson 1: Astronomy C
Astronomy is a C division event in Science Olympiad. For those coming in from
division B (including those who did Reach for the Stars) it’s very different from what
you’ve seen before. You will be competing against high schoolers, many of whom are
VERY good at studying. Keep that in mind while considering how much time to put into
studying for Astronomy and your other events.
Somewhat relevant; Astronomy is almost never taught in high school curriculum,
and when it is, it’s usually an elective people take to raise their GPA. Most people
consider a lack of background in the event a disadvantage for those competing in
Astronomy, however I see it the other way. See, in say Anatomy or Chemistry Lab, most
of the people competing already have a basic understanding of the content, making it
that much harder to beat all of them. In Astronomy, everyone starts from scratch, and by
studying well one can easily get ahead.
Lesson 2: The Rules
As you probably already know, each Science Olympiad event has a page (or two)
of rules released in the rules manual every year. The Astronomy rules sheet has some
parts that stay the same every year, and other parts that vary year to year. I cannot post
a copy of the rules on the internet because that’s illegal; however I will give a description
of each part of the rules:
1. Description: Very briefly describes the event and lists the two topics for that year’s
season. One of the topics is always stellar evolution, and the other topic switches every
one or two years.
2. Event Parameters: Says what you can and cannot do during the event. You and your
partner are allowed to each bring a binder or a computer (I know right, a whole
computer! More on that later) and each of you can also bring a programmable or other
kind of calculator. Internet access is not allowed, so everything on your computer must
be downloaded.
3: The Competition: This constitutes the vast majority of the rules page, as it gives the
content of what will actually be asked of you during tests. The details are described later
in this guide, but know that it is split into three sections: Part A lists what can be asked
for in concept questions, Part B has math topics and Part C lists the ‘DSOs.’ DSOs, or
Deep Sky Objects, are simply objects in space. In the Astronomy event there are 17
specific DSOs related to the two topics for the event that year (e. g. If the topic is
‘exoplanets’ then most of the DSOs will be or relate to exoplanets). This will all be
discussed more later in the guide.

Lesson 3: Distances in Astronomy
Time to get right into the content of the event =D! But before that, I’ll briefly
answer one question: What is Astronomy?
I’d say Astronomy is the study of the objects and processes of the universe both
in general (like all­encompassing astronomical laws) and in specific cases (like the
study of the solar system). Astronomy as a Science Olympiad event looks mainly as the
study of the universe in general as well as that applied to a few specific details. Knowing
this, we can move on to distance equations.
Objects in space are very far away. Far enough away that we had to make up a
set of units for distances just within our own solar system, and when we discovered how
distant other stars and galaxies were, we needed to create yet another system.
The first system mentioned here (for distances within the solar system) uses the
AU, or Astronomical Unit. 1 AU is equal to 1.496*1011 meters, which is also the distance
from the Earth to the sun. These are now used not only within our own solar system, but
also in multiple­star systems and planetary systems of other stars. The latter system is
the system of light­years and parsecs, and are generally used for every scale where AU
are too small to be used practically. A light year is calculated as the distance light travels
in a year (wow!); which is a considerable 9.46*1015 meters. However, astronomers (and
Scioly test writers) prefer to use the parsec over the light year because they are more
useful in equations. Know that a parsec is 3.26 light years, since tests can ask for
either unit in answers.
Parallax
However cool it would be, we cannot build giant space meter sticks to measure
the distance to objects. There are several indirect methods we can use, though. One of
these is parallax. Parallax can be understood fairly easily since humans use it all the
time with our eyes. Notice how if you look at one thing with one eye closed, then look at
it with the other eye closed. It should appear to shift position relative to the background.
Try it again with objects of different distances, and these objects will appear to shift
more or less depending on if they are closer or farther away. This is the essence of
parallax; by looking at things from different angles, we can find the distances to these
things.
With objects in space, astronomers make a measurement of an object’s position
at one part of the year and another measurement six months later. This gives them a
wide angle to work with (across Earth’s full orbit, which makes the measurements more
accurate. After finding the angle in between the different apparent positions of the
object, we use the following formula to find the distance to it:

1/p = D

Where D is the distance to the object in parsecs and p is parallax angle in
arcseconds, shown in this image:

In astronomy we also use a different system of angles. Objects are so far away,
so the angles between two objects can be incredibly small; too small to effectively use
degrees. This angle system is sexagesimal­­ one degree is 60 arcminutes (denoted with
an apostrophe ‘), and an arcminute is 60 arcseconds (denoted by quotes “ or
milliarcseconds by mas). With parallax, the angles used are so small that the closest
star, Proxima Centauri, at 1.306 parsecs distant, gives a parallax angle of 0.768’’ (768
mas), or less than one arcsecond. This is for the star with the largest parallax angle, so
instruments that calculate parallax must be extremely precise.
Distance Modulus
The other main way of calculating distances is with the distance modulus. But
before I show you more equations, you must first understand a few concepts of light.
The first is the inverse square law. This states that the apparent intensity of light is
inversely proportional to the square of the distance to the source of the light. You can
test this easily; place a lamp or other light source somewhere. Look at it from two
meters away, then again from one meter away. Because the second time you were
twice as close, it should have appeared four times as bright ((1/(1/2))2=4). Theoretically,
if you measured how bright the lamp appeared from either distance, then you could use
that and the distance to the lamp to find out how bright it truly is. The relationship
between these three is called the distance modulus.
Astronomers call the actual brightness of the object its absolute magnitude
(denoted by (capital) M), and how bright it appears from Earth its apparent magnitude
(denoted by (lowercase) m). These are measured with the Pogson scale. In this
logarithmic (but not base 10) scale, lower numbers are brighter than higher numbers,
and every five steps is 100 times brighter/dimmer (which makes each step

√100
5

or

around 2.512 times brighter/dimmer). For reference, the Sun has an apparent
magnitude of ­25, Sirius (the brightest star after the sun) is ­1.46, and the dimmest stars
in the sky are 6. The Pogson scale is based on the old Hipparchus scale, which was
used by the ancient Greeks (and invented by Greek astronomer Hipparchus); this
system differed in that it only ranged from 1­6, whereas the Pogson scale can go as dim
or bright as we can observe.
Now for some equations. To find the distance to an object once you know its
apparent and absolute magnitudes:

10((m−M )/5)+1) = D

Where D is the distance to the object in parsecs. It is important to note that the
magnitudes are unitless variables.
Measuring apparent magnitude is very easy, however absolute magnitude is
much harder. There are a number of ways to do this, but right now know two important
ones: spectroscopy and standard candles. There will be more details later, but
spectroscopy measures the spectrum of a star, and we can use this to find its absolute
magnitude. This is called the spectroscopic parallax. A standard candle is an object that
either always has the same absolute magnitude, or its absolute magnitude can be found
with a certain relationship between another property that can be measured.
Lesson 4: Angles in Space
Once you know the distance to something, you can start to measure other things,
including the distances between objects in space. Solving for these uses only some
simple trigonometry. Take a look at this problem:
The image below shows planetary system HR 8799. Using the scale bar on the
bottom­right, find the distance to the system.

The scale bar is 0.5 arcseconds, which is 20 AU wide in HR 8799. Using this we
can draw an isosceles triangle:

Now draw a line from the leftmost point to the center of the rightmost line. This
splits the triangle into two right triangles, which lets us do trigonometry, and also gives
the distance line, which we can now solve for:

tan(θ/2) =

opposite
adjacent

= tan(0.25") = tan(0.0000694°) =

10
D

6

Solving for D we get 8.26 * 10 AU; dividing by 206265 we get 40.0 parsecs.
While this is the most exact answer, there is a much easier way to solve this without
drawing triangles. This method is called the small angle approximation. The
approximation itself states that at very small angles, such as the ones we deal with in
Astronomy:

sin(θ) ≈ tan(θ) ≈ θ
Using this we can simplify the earlier equation to the following:

θ=

d
D

Where θ is the angular separation between the objects in arcseconds,
(lowercase) d is the distance between the objects in AU and (uppercase) D is the
distance to the objects in parsecs. With this equation, we can still plug in 0.5” for θ and
20 AU for d, and we still get 40 for D. This method will save you time, which is very
important for competition day. There are also different forms of the small angle
approximation using different units; you can have the angle in radians, degrees or
arcminutes (technically angle measures are unitless, so these are “proportions” not
different units), the two distance units can both be in parsecs, or D can be in light years.
Whatever works best for you.
Lesson 5: Light and the Electromagnetic Spectrum
We use light (or as physicists like to call it, electromagnetic radiation) to observe
everything in astronomy. Light travels in the form of waves, and is classified by how
much energy it has. There are several similarities no matter how much energy it has;
first of all, they are made of particles called photons. This means that they’re both
waves and particles; don’t dwell on this for too long. Photons are massless, and objects
without mass travel at the speed of light (they travel slower when passing through other

substances, but this is the only exception). The speed of light is measured to be exactly
8
299,792,458 m/s. This is usually rounded to 3 * 10 , which can be plugged into a
calculator much faster than the exact speed.
Light as a Wave
Because light is a wave it has all the same properties of waves­ frequency,
wavelength and speed. The equation f * λ = s where f is the frequency of the wave in
hertz, λ is wavelength in meters and s is speed in meters per second. However, as
mentioned above the speed of light is constant, so we can rewrite the equation as
f * λ = c where c is the speed of light in meters per second. This means that frequency
and wavelength are solely dependent on each other; each wavelength has a
corresponding frequency and vise­versa. It is also important to know that the frequency
of a photon is directly proportional to its energy, while the wavelength of a photon is
inversely proportional to energy.
Light waves are classified by wavelength/frequency in what is known as the
electromagnetic spectrum. The main categories are, by decreasing wavelength, radio,
infrared, visible, ultraviolet, X­ray and gamma ray as this image shows:

The exact wavelengths are as follows: radio >1 mm, infrared 700 nm ­ 1 mm,
visible 400­700 nm, ultraviolet 100­400 nm, X­ray 0.01­100 nm, gamma ray >0.01 nm.
Stefan­Boltzmann Law
There are several laws governing the formation and propagation of light in space.
One of which is the inverse square law, which I described earlier with the distance
modulus. Another is the Stefan­Boltzmann Law, which describes how much energy is
released by stars (and to a lesser extent other objects in space).

This Stefan­Boltzmann Law is based on the principle that objects with
temperature radiate energy in the form of light. The amount of energy released per unit
time of an object is directly proportional to the temperature (to the fourth power) and
surface area of the object as shown below:

L = SA * T 4 * σ

Where L is luminosity in Watts, SA is surface area in meters squared, T is
8
temperature in Kelvin and σ is the Stefan­Boltzmann constant equal to 5.67 * 10−
Joules per meter squared per Kelvin to the fourth per second (Whew!). For stars,
planets, or whatever needs its luminosity calculated (astronomers call these objects
blackbodies), we can generally assume they are spheres, so we substitute in the
formula of the surface area of a sphere:

L = 4πR2 σT 4
Where R is the radius of the blackbody in meters, T is still temperature in Kelvin
and L is its luminosity in Watts. Conveniently, this equation can also be used to solve for
radius or temperature. While the Stefan­Boltzmann equation can be used to find the
luminosity of just about anything, it is nearly always used for stars. When solving for the
luminosity, radius or temperature of a star we use a system of units called solar units.
This makes problems that use the Stefan­Boltzmann equation easier by getting rid of
the constants and simplifying unit conversions. The units themselves are simply the
number corresponding to that property of the sun. For example, one solar luminosity is
26
8
equal to 3.828 * 10 Watts, and one solar radius is equal to 6.955 * 10 meters. To find
the luminosity of another star in solar luminosities, divide the luminosity of that star in
Watts by the luminosity of the sun in Watts. We can do this to the Stefan­Boltzmann
equation and rewrite it as:

L = R2 T 4
Where L is luminosities in solar luminosities, R is radius in solar radii and T is
temperature in solar temperatures (5778 Kelvin).
Wien’s Law
The next law related to light is Wien’s Law (pronounced vee­ens). It roughly
states that as an object gets hotter, its peak wavelength becomes smaller. This is shown
in blackbody curves, such as the one on the next page:

A blackbody curve plots the intensity of an object against wavelength­ thus
showing how bright it is at different wavelengths. As you can see, each curve on the
diagram has a corresponding temperature as well as a ‘peak’ or ‘max’ wavelength at
which the luminosity is highest. Through Wien’s Law there is a relationship between the
temperature of an object and the peak wavelength, so if we are given a curve like this
without the temperature marked, we can find it! The equation for this relationship is:

λ=

b
T or

T =

b
λ

Where T is temperature in Kelvin and λ is wavelength in meters. Often Wien’s
Law problems are combined with Stefan­Boltzmann Law problems by giving you the
blackbody curve and radius of a star and ask you to calculate the luminosity. You can do
this by using the curve to find the temperature, then using the temperature in the
Stefan­Boltzmann equation.
Something I forgot to mention earlier­ a blackbody is defined as an object that
absorbs all of the light that comes into contact with it. It can still emit/radiate light (in fact
it always does this). Blackbodies are, however, only approximations of real objects;
perfect blackbodies don’t exist, but stars are pretty close and can be modelled as such.
Also while all objects radiate light, not all light arises due to the Stefan­Boltzmann
Law. Hot gases emit light through their electrons dropping in energy levels (we use this
light to study nebulae, which are giant clouds of gases). An example of this on Earth is
incandescent vs. fluorescent light bulbs. Incandescent light bulbs create light by heating
up the metal filament inside them enough for it to generate light via the
Stefan­Boltzmann Law. Fluorescent light bulbs excite the electrons of the gas inside
them; these electrons then drop in energy levels and emit light.
Doppler Effect

I know this section with all of the math has been really fun, so I’ll switch it up now
with...get ready...more math! (yay!) This bit is on the Doppler Effect. The Doppler Effect
is simply the effect a moving source has on the light it emits. If a light source is moving
towards you, the light you receive will be blueshifted­ it will appear to have a shorter
wavelength than the light that was actually emitted. Conversely, if the light source is
moving away from you it will be redshifted­ you will perceive it to be of longer
wavelength than what was emitted. The doppler effect takes place not only for a moving
source but for any relative motion­ so it is actually the sum of the motion of the source
and the motion of the observer. There is an equation relating the relative velocity to the
wavelength emitted; this is used by astronomers to find the velocity of a light­emitting
object:

λapp
λtrue

=1+

v
c

Where λapp is the wavelength of the observed light, λtrue is the real wavelength of
the light emitted, v is the relative velocity of the object and c is the speed of light.
Lesson 6: Orbital Mechanics
Determining the properties of orbits was one of the first problems in astronomy,
but now it’s a problem you get to solve! So, get a calculator and get ready for some
orbital laws!
Newton’s Law of Gravitation
Since orbits are determined solely by the force of gravity, it’s good to know how
gravity works even though questions directly related to gravity are rare. Gravity is a
force in the universe acting on all things with mass. The value of this force is found with
the equation:

F =

Gm1 m2
R2

Where F is the force of gravity in Newtons, G is Newton’s gravitational constant
3
11
G = 6.67 * 10− kgm s2 , m1 and m2 are the masses of two objects in kilograms and R is
*

the distance between the two objects (technically the distance between the centers of
the objects) in meters. This equation only works for two objects, and since gravity is a
mutual interaction of everything in the universe it is only a simplification.
Kepler’s Laws
Johannes Kepler was a 17th century astronomer who made a number of great
discoveries; one of which was his three laws of planetary motion. These laws form the
basis of orbital mechanics, an area of physics describing the motion of bodies in
gravitational orbit.

Kepler’s First Law: Any object in orbit takes an elliptical path. This simply
means that the shape of the path an object makes through its orbit is an ellipse; also,
we can use the properties of ellipses to find the properties of orbits. An ellipse is a
geometric shape kinda like a circle but stretched out. Imagine a circle with two of its
radii marked at right angles. If the radii are the same length, it is a circle; however if they
are different lengths, the shape is called an ellipse. In an ellipse, the longer radius is
called the semi­major axis, and the shorter radius is the semi­minor axis.
Eccentricity is the measure of how stretched out the ellipse is, where e=0 is a circle to
e=1 is so stretched it becomes a parabola. The image on the next page shows the
elements of an ellipse:

Another important element noted is the focus (plural foci). The foci are two
points along each of the semi­major axes; its distance f from the center is equal to the
semi­major axis multiplied by the eccentricity. In any orbit the barycenter, or center of
gravity of the orbital system is located at one of the foci. In most planetary orbits this is
where the central star is located. There are also two points located on the ellipse and
one of the semi­major axes; these points are the periastron and apastron (or some
variation of the prefixes ‘peri­’ and ‘ap­’). These are the closest and furthest points in the
orbit from the barycenter respectively. The following table sums all of this up with a list
of equations for each of the ellipse elements. Don’t memorise these, but they could
show up on a test:

Ellipse Element

If you know

Use

distap

a and e

distap = a(1 + e)

distperi

a and e

distperi = a(1 ­ e)

a

distap distperi

2a = distap + distperi

e

distap distperi

e = (distap ­ distperi) / (distap +
distperi)

f

a and e

f = ae

f

a and b

f = √a2 − b2

f

distap distperi

2f = distap − distperi

e

a and b

e

a and f

e = f/a

b

e and a

b = a√1 − e 2

a

e and b

a = b/√1 − e 2

e=

√1 − b /a
2

2

Kepler’s Second Law: Kepler’s second law states that an orbiting body will
‘sweep out’ equal areas of its orbit in equal amounts of time. This essentially means a
body will accelerate as it approaches the barycenter, and slow down as it approaches
the opposite focus. The difference in acceleration is greater with greater eccentricities.
Kepler’s Second Law also states that the sum of the kinetic and potential
energies of an orbit always add up to the same number. This is known as the principle
of conservation of energy. From here, we also find that the angular momentum of
orbiting objects is conserved, in the law of conservation of angular momentum. This
gives us the equation:

M 1V 1 = M 2V 2
Where M1 and V1 are the mass and velocity (respectively) of object 1 and M2 and
V2 are the mass and velocity of object 2; in an orbit with object 1 and 2. Note this only
applies so circular orbits; elliptical orbits are more complicated. Some questions give
you the mass of a central body and the orbital period of another body and ask you to

find the mass of the second body. As you’ll see later in this lesson you’ll be able to find it
with this and other equations.
Kepler’s Third Law: This is the big one, with lots of math. It relates the
semi­major axis, orbital period and mass of the system in one equation, which is:

p2 * M = a3

Where p is the orbital period in years, M is the mass of the system (make sure to
include the total mass of the system­ include all stars; you can ignore any planets given)
in solar masses and a is the semi­major axis in AU. The units are important on this one­
always convert into these units before calculating; other units do not work. The period of
an orbit is the amount of time it takes for an object in orbit to return to its original
position.
Orbital and Radial Velocity: Now that we know how to find the period and semi­major
axis of an orbit we can apply those to find the velocity of an object in orbit. There are
two ways to find the velocity of an orbiting object; however these really only work for
orbiting planets. The first one looks like:

v=

2πa
p

Where v is velocity of the planet in m/s, a is the semi­major axis in meters and p
is the period of the orbit in seconds. This is simply the standard form of the velocity
equation (velocity = distance/time) since the distance of an orbit its circumference (here
we approximate with a circle) and the time is just the period. The other form is:

v=

√

GM
a

Where G is the gravitational constant, M is the mass of the system in kilograms
and a is the semi­major axis in meters. In both of these forms you need to convert the
units into the right form, otherwise the numbers will be wrong.
Radial velocity is a method used to determine the orbital velocity of stars in
binary systems (star systems with two stars). It works using the doppler effect; as the
two stars in the system orbit they move towards and away from us. We can measure the
wavelengths of light the stars emit, and if they blueshift and redshift in a periodic fashion
then we can use the doppler equation to find out how fast they are moving. A radial
velocity curve looks like this:

From here you can find the semi­major axis or the mass of the system depending
on what you’re given.
Lesson 7: Stellar Spectra and Classification
A star is typed by its spectrum and absolute magnitude. Any star fits into one of
seven spectral classes, with each class having 10 subclasses. The classes are
distinguished mainly by temperature. The seven classes are: O, B, A, F, G, K, M from
highest to lowest temperatures. There are ten subclasses in every class, these are: 0, 1,
2, 3, ..., 9 again from highest to lowest temperature. Spectral classes are notated by
class first then subclass (for example, G2 is the Sun’s class). This website:
http://www.uni.edu/morgans/astro/course/Notes/section2/spectraltemps.html has a list
of the temperatures for many of the spectral classes and subclasses.
So you may be asking, “so these spectra seem cool and all, but what do they
look like?” An example of a spectrum is shown below:

The dark lines throughout the spectrum are called absorption lines. These are
wavelengths of light that were first emitted by the star, then absorbed by materials in the

star corresponding to the wavelengths that are no longer in the spectrum. By matching
the lines to the materials that create those absorption lines we can find the spectral
class of the star. This chart shows what the spectra of each main class looks like:

Sometimes tests will give a spectrum and ask what spectral class it is. Use the
chart above or a similar one and match the picture they give you to the correct spectral
class.
The width of the absorption lines can also help classify stars. The spectrum of a
denser star will give wider absorption lines, and a less dense star will give thinner
absorption lines. This effect is called spectral broadening, and we can use this to
determine the luminosity class of the star. The luminosity classes are:
I: Supergiants
II: Bright Giants
III: Giants
IV: Subgiants
V: Main Sequence
VI: White Dwarfs
Each luminosity class corresponds to a stage in stellar evolution. Speaking of
stellar evolution...
Lesson 8: Stellar Evolution
Before we jump into stellar evolution, you need to know about a very useful tool
in astronomy: the HR diagram. HR stands for Hertzsprung­Russell, the two scientists
who came up with it. This diagram plots luminosity on the y­axis and spectral class or
temperature on the x­axis (note that the x­axis is reverse­ as a point moves rightward on
the diagram it becomes cooler). Because these two properties change throughout a
star’s life, a star will move its position on the HR diagram; thus, we can make

generalisations about different stages of evolution based on the position of stars in that
stage of evolution on the HR diagram. Here is an example of an HR diagram:

Also mass­ mass is the single most important property of any star because the
initial mass a star has predicts everything in its evolution. In addition, stars with more
mass go through their lives­ and each stage of evolution­ more quickly than less
massive stars. Remember these two points when reading about stellar evolution.
Nebulae
A nebula is a cloud of gas in space. There are many different types of nebulae,
but for now we’re focusing on one kind­ star formation regions. This is an umbrella term
for any nebula in the process of forming stars; whether some stars have already formed
there or no stars will form for millions of years. These regions are composed of several
elements and usually molecules too, but are overwhelmingly composed of hydrogen.
Hydrogen is the most common element in the universe, so naturally it’s what makes up
stars too.
This hydrogen (and other stuff as well) pretty much just sits in place for millions of
years, moving around a bit, occasionally colliding with other hydrogen. At some point a
center of mass forms in the cloud and the material in the cloud begins orbiting around it.
The cloud smooths out into a sphere. Eventually, the material near the center of the
cloud aggregates into a core, which begins to build up more hydrogen from gravitational
interactions. This core will become a protostar.
Protostars

A protostar does emit light, however this light cannot be seen due to being
surrounded by the sphere (now envelope, basically a hollowed­out sphere). The light
comes from material falling into the core due to gravitational potential energy; the loss of
this energy is converted into light. Along with an envelope, a disk of material around the
star also forms, this is mainly where the material accreting onto the core comes from.
Eventually the envelope fragments and the material in the envelope is blown
away via radiation pressure from the protostar. At some point the protostar becomes a
pre­main­sequence star. The difference between protostars and pre­main­sequence
stars isn’t clear­cut, but the most agreeable difference I’ve seen is that
pre­main­sequence stars are visible on Earth and protostars cannot be seen because of
the envelope surrounding them.
Pre­main­sequence stars
Pre­main­sequence stars go into one of two (technically three) categories based
on their mass. Pre­main­sequence stars (abbreviated as PMS star from now on) of <2
solar masses are called T Tauri stars and PMS stars of 2­8 solar masses are called
Herbig Ae/Be stars. They have different types of variability, but are otherwise mostly the
same. Above 8 solar masses, stars move through the PMS stage so quickly that they
cannot be observed as PMS stars; only as main­sequence stars.
PMS stars follow a specific path along the HR diagram called the Hayashi track.
Technically, their actual path is a combination of the Hayashi track and the Henyey
track; the Hayashi track is the phase that the star transfers energy through convection
and the Henyey track is the phase the star uses radiation to transfer energy. Low­mass
stars spend more (relative) time on the Hayashi track and high­mass stars spend more
time on the Henyey track. I’ll just refer to it as the Hayashi track for simplicity. Anyway,
the Hayashi track moves downwards and to the right on the HR diagram­ meaning the
temperature of the star is increasing but its luminosity is decreasing. From this we can
tell that PMS stars are brighter but cooler than main­sequence stars. The Hayashi track
takes ~3­60 million years (depending on the mass of the star) and ends when the star
establishes hydrostatic equilibrium. Hydrostatic equilibrium is when the force of gravity
on the star pushing inward is balanced by a force pushing outward. For main­sequence
stars this force is nuclear fusion, the process of turning multiple atoms into a single
atom. This converts mass into energy, which releases enormous amounts of energy.
Main­sequence stars
The main sequence takes up 90% of a star’s life­ by the time our sun will have
reached the end of the main sequence it will have spent 10 billion years on the
main­sequence. Main­sequence stars slowly move up and to the right (on the HR
diagram) as they age, but other than this they don’t move.

Main­sequence stars are comprised mainly of hydrogen­ this is also the element
they fuse. Specifically they fuse hydrogen into helium. Over time this builds up in the
core and leads into the next stages in stellar evolution.
From here the paths of low and high mass stars differ, where the boundary
between low and high mass is ~8 solar masses.
Low Mass Post­Main­Sequence Evolution
Subgiant Phase
After the hydrogen fuel has run out in the core, the star will no longer be able to
sustain hydrostatic equilibrium, as nuclear reactions have stopped. Thus, gravity will
overtake the outward force, and the star will begin to contract. As the star contracts the
star’s temperature increases. At some point, it will increase enough to begin hydrogen
fusion in a shell outside the core. This pushes the photosphere outward, making the star
appear brighter, and since the photosphere is now spread over more area its
temperature drops. Thus, from end main­sequence the star moves up and to the left on
the HR diagram during the subgiant phase. As this phase continues, the helium as a
byproduct of fusion in the shell outside the core moves towards the core and builds up.
Red Giant Branch
There is no fine line between subgiant and red giant branches; the red giant is
mainly a continuation of what began in the subgiant phase. The core contracts more
and more, the outer layers continue to expand. It moves much further upward on the HR
diagram, because of how much larger the outer layers are. The temperature is spread
out over a much larger volume because they are much larger, so the total temperature
decreases, and the star moves to the right on the HR diagram.
Horizontal Branch
At the end of the red giant branch, the core will have enough heat and pressure
to begin fusing helium into beryllium, carbon and oxygen (but mostly just carbon). This
reinvigorated nuclear reaction (also known as the helium flash) heats up the star, but it
also makes the star larger; this creates a (roughly) zero net change in luminosity so it
moves horizontally to the left on the HR diagram. Hence, the horizontal branch. As the
core becomes increasingly made up of carbon, the star will start heating up again and
the star moves to the right on the HR diagram.
During this stage the star will be part of a class of stars called ‘pulsating
variables’. These stars vary in brightness by becoming larger and smaller periodically.
There are many types of pulsating stars; some notable ones are RR Lyrae and Cepheid
variables. Both of these are used as standard candles; RR Lyrae stars always have the
same range of luminosities and Cepheids have something called a period luminosity
relationship. In both of these cases we can use the distance modulus to find the
distance to objects.

Asymptotic Giant Branch and Planetary Nebula
For the star there is nothing left other than a dense core in the middle and some
loosely bound layers of gas outside of it. This stage is similar to the red giant branch,
but instead of helium buildup at the core it’s carbon buildup. The radius of the star is so
big that the distance separating the outer layers and the core is large enough that the
core can’t keep in the outer layers, and they are ejected away from the core. This
spreads the gas over a huge volume, so the luminosity stays really high, and without the
cooler outer layers, the core becomes very hot; the star moves to the upper­left corner
of the HR diagram. The outer layers form a planetary nebula. At some point the
planetary nebula is so far spread out that it no longer contributes to the luminosity of the
core, so the star drops to the bottom left corner, and becomes a white dwarf.
White Dwarfs
White dwarfs are small and hot. Their surface gravity is extremely high. If a white
dwarf is formed in a single­star system, then it will radiate its energy away, which slowly
cools it off, and eventually becomes a black dwarf. This is basically a floating ball of
carbon and other elements in space. The universe hasn’t been around long enough for
black dwarfs to form, but current astrophysics predicts their existence.
White dwarfs aren’t made of “normal” matter like you find on Earth; instead they
are made of degenerate matter. In normal matter electrons fit into orbitals, something
you’ve probably learned in chemistry class. Two important quantum mechanical laws
apply to electrons: 1) two electrons cannot occupy the same space and 2) the smaller
space an electron is confined to, the greater its momentum. Now, this normal matter has
a relatively constant distance between each of the electron orbitals. However, the
gravity of white dwarfs presses down with an immense force. This forces the electrons
in the white dwarf to be pushed closer together. As a result of the electrons being
confined to a smaller space, their momenta increases dramatically; considering this
occurs over the entire white dwarf it adds up to enough pressure to stop the star from
collapsing. This pressure is known as electron degeneracy pressure. However, this can
only sustain white dwarfs up to a certain amount of mass. If the mass of a white dwarf
exceeds this limit, it will violently explode in an event called a supernova.
Type Ia Supernovae
The limit mentioned is the Chandrasekhar limit. At 1.44 solar masses, very few
stars end up exceeding the limit. However, if the white dwarf is in a binary system, it has
a good chance of going supernova. Take a binary system with main­sequence stars of
different initial masses. The higher­mass star will go through its life faster than the
lower­mass star, and will become a white dwarf while the other star is still in
main­sequence. Once the lower­mass star has reached the end of the main­sequence
and begins to expand, if the two stars are close enough the white dwarf can pull in
some of the mass of the giant via gravity. If it pulls in enough mass to exceed the

Chandrasekhar limit, it will go supernova. The extra mass on the white dwarf triggers all
of the matter in the white dwarf to fuse, releasing a huge amount of energy in a
thermonuclear explosion.
There are two ways for the type Ia supernova to occur; the above is one of them,
however there is another. A binary system of two white dwarfs will slowly give of
gravitational radiation (aka gravitational waves). This causes the distance between the
white dwarfs to shrink, culminating in the merging of the stars. As the resulting star is
more massive than the chandrasekhar limit, it explodes in a type Ia supernova.

Note that this is a type Ia supernova. High mass stars can undergo a type II
supernova. Speaking of high mass stars, this is the post­main­sequence evolution of
stars with masses >8 solar masses:
High Mass Post­Main­Sequence Evolution
High mass stars evolve mostly the same way as low mass stars up through the
horizontal branch (only they do each stage faster). That’s where things begin to differ.
Horizontal Branch / Asymptotic Giant Branch
Just like low mass stars, high mass stars burn helium in their cores into carbon
and other elements. However, stars above eight solar masses can fuse carbon once the
carbon core has contracted enough. Carbon fuses into neon and other elements; the
neon builds up and begins fusing into other elements­ this continues until the core fuses
elements into silicon. Each time a new element is fused the star makes another ‘loop’
on the HR diagram; heating up while fusing the element in the core and cooling done
while fusing it in outer shells. Silicon fusion creates iron. Iron is different because it

cannot fuse in the core of a star; instead it undergoes fission. Fission is the reverse
process of fusion; it breaks apart an atom. Iron fission is really inefficient, so when this
process begins it takes all of the energy out of the core. This unbalances the hydrostatic
equilibrium and the core collapses. This leads to a type II supernova.
Type II supernova
The collapse of the core from iron fusion is stopped by one of two things­ neutron
degeneracy pressure or black hole formation. Either way, the collapse creates a
shockwave that travels outwards with an extreme amount of energy. This meets the
outer layers and sends them outwards with an extreme amount of energy. This energy
heats up the material enough to fuse more heavy elements, and also makes the
remnant very luminous.
Neutron Stars and Black Holes
Back to the core now. If the original star was 8­25 solar masses, then a force
called neutron degeneracy pressure will stop the collapse of the star. Basically, a
neutron star is the remaining core from a high mass star. When electron degeneracy
pressure isn’t high enough to stop the collapse of the star, the electrons of all the atoms
are forced into the atomic nuclei. Due to a weird quirk, the protons and electrons merge
to become neutrons, and the star is made up mostly of neutrons. The collapse of the
neutron star is held back by a force called neutron degeneracy pressure; this is
similar­ish to electron degeneracy pressure but much stronger.
When neutron degeneracy pressure isn’t enough to stop the collapse of the star,
there is one last force that can stop it. Haha, just kidding. The star collapses,
completely. To a single point of infinite density; a black hole. This occurs at an initial
mass of >25 solar masses. Black holes are currently one of the frontiers of modern
physics, and rarely show up on scioly tests, but can be quite interesting if you want to
study them in your freetime.
Lesson 9: Strategy
However interesting astronomy is as a subject, you won’t place first by studying
aimlessly. This section focuses on the competition and how to beat the other teams.
Laptop or Binder?
For the Astronomy event, your team (assuming you bring two people to
competition) is allowed to bring two laptops, two binders or a laptop and a binder. Each
has its pros and cons, which will be discussed here:
Laptop:
● Pros
○ Can hold much more information than a binder
○ No printing required

○
○
○
● Cons
○
○
○
○
○

Easy search function if you know what you’re looking for (Ctrl+f)
Fits better on a desk than a massive binder
Can write/download programs

Has lag :/
Can be expensive if you don’t already have a personal laptop
Hard to switch between pages
Navigation is difficult when trying to find a specific section
More breakable than a binder (this happened to my partner a few days
before nationals)
○ Can run out of battery at inconvenient times
Alternatively, tablets count as laptops, which has its own set of pros/cons.
Binder:
● Pros
○ Viewing is much easier with two pages at a time
○ Zero lag (you fly through the pages with sheet protectors­ also sheet
protectors allow you to do two­sided pages)
○ Cheap (except for printing costs), basically indestructible and battery
never runs out
○ You gain valuable info by writing the content in the binder
○ No Ctrl+f, but you can use tabs if you know where to find stuff
● Cons
○ Printing can be a problem if you don’t have easy access to school/home
printers
○ Takes a long time to prepare, which is troublesome if state is a week away
○ No programs
○ Takes up a lot of space on a desk
So much of this is circumstantial­ if you and your partner each have a personal
laptop and no easy access to printing, then two laptops would be totally fine. On the
other hand, if your families don’t let you have a computer then binders would be the
better choice. However, if you have the option to, make at least one binder, even if
you never bring it to competition. The knowledge you gain by writing one is
priceless. At regionals this past year I thought using two laptops would be okay. I
placed first, but I didn’t deserve to­ in the end, writing a binder made me better at
Astronomy than anything else. I don’t suggest the binder for its use in competition­ I
only used it once or twice during nationals­ but because after writing it you won’t need it.
A second binder really won’t help you much more than the first one, so overall I
suggest one binder and one laptop. But of course, it’s up to the preference of you and
your partner.

Write all of your resources yourself
I cannot stress this enough. I’ve seen entire binders­ some from teammates­ that
look really impressive with 300+ pages...printed off Wikipedia and other online
resources they found. You’ll have no time to use those during competition. A binder you
write yourself may have less info overall, but it will probably be worth a lot more if it’s
information you know you’ll need. If you do all the research and write everything in your
own words, you’ll probably remember most of it; then you won’t need to reference it
during competition.
Use Wikipedia responsibly
Often test writers will pull questions directly from Wikipedia pages; usually
because they don’t care to do the proper research. Use this to your advantage­ take
everything listed on the Astronomy rules (including the DSOs) and print off the wikipedia
page for it, then place it where it fits in your binder. However, don’t rely on wikipedia;
make sure to do most of your own research and write it up yourself.
Ratio Method (also called proportionality)
This is a method to do math questions more quickly. Often test writers will ask a
question like “star A is 10 times larger than star B and the same temperature; how many
times more luminous is star A than star B?” The easiest way to do this is to take the
ratio of the Stefan­Boltzmann Law of star A and divide it by the SB Law of star B. This
will look something like this:

LA
LB

=

(4π)RA2 σT A4

(4π)RB2 σT B4

4
4
Since 4π = 4π , σ = σ , and T A = T B we can remove them from the equation. This
leaves us with:

LA
LB

=

RA2

RB2

Now we can substitute 10 for RA and 1 for RB, which gives us an answer of 100
times more luminous. You can do this for almost any equation in astronomy; try using it
to figure out the best way to do math problems.
Binder Structure
The way you set up your binder is mainly up to you, but there are two important
things to have: 1) a separate section for DSOs (and one page for every DSO) and 2) an
easily accessible page with important equations and constants (Wien’s Constant, the
solar radius in meters, the parsec in meters, etc). These two will be the pages you’ll use
the most during the competition so know where they are.
DSOs
As I mentioned near the beginning of this guide, DSOs are Deep Sky Objects;
there are 17 listed on the rules every year, and they represent the topics for that

season. Questions of any kind can be asked for on tests; anything from its distance
from Earth to whether it has methane in its atmosphere, so make sure to have plenty of
info on each one. Test writers also ask for basic identification of the object from pictures;
the best way to do this is to pull as many pictures as possible from google images onto
your notes sheet for that DSO. Here (on the next page) is an example of a DSO page I
used for last season:
Overview: T Tauri is a variable PMS star in the constellation Taurus, and the prototype
for T Tauri stars in general. It appears near the Hyades open cluster, and is physically
close to Hind’s Reflection Nebula, giving it a characteristic look in photos.
Physical Details
Absolute Magnitude: 4.42
Apparent Magnitude: 10.27
Spectral Type: G5
Mass: 2.1 Solar Masses
Age: 0.4 Ma
Distance and Appearance
Distance: 481 LY, 147.6 Pc
Constellation: Taurus
Right Ascension: 04h 21m 59.43445s
Declension: +19° 32′ 06.4182″
Parallax Angle: 0.00548 arcseconds (5.48 mas)
Color Indices: U­B: +0.8 B­V: +1.22
Other Features
Radial Velocity: 23.9 km/s
Proper Motion: +15.51 mas/yr (RA), ­13.67 mas/yr (Dec)
Other Names: T Tau, AG+19° 341, BD+19° 706, HBC 35,HD 284419, HH 355, HIP
20390, JP11 3794,VDB 28
­The T Tauri system has 3 stars. The visible one is called T Tau N (the one I’ve been
talking about) and shows silicate emissions. T Tau Sa is the largest body in the system,
shows silicate absorption and emits with huge variations in the infrared. T Tau Sb is the
smallest one, has no observations of silicates and is observed as an 8th magnitude star
with a spectral class of M0.
Discovery
It was first discovered in 1852 by John Hind. At that time, it had been dimmer,
but started increasing in luminosity; was at the 10th magnitude. He also discovered next
to it Hind’s reflection nebula (NGC 1555), which also varies in luminosity based on that
of T Tauri. Papers in the 1860s noted it was no longer visible. In 1890, Shelburn
Burnham found that T Tauri was in a small nebula, now called Burnham’s nebula (not a

reflection nebula). This nebula is no longer visible. A Herbig­Haro object (HH 355) is 30
AS west of NGC 1555, and could be related to either T Tauri or 1555.
T Tauri South was discovered by Simon Dyck in 1982, due to strange variations in
the infrared. This was confirmed and data had begun to be collected, it was later found
that it has variations of 2 magnitudes in the L and K bands.
Koresco et. al. in 2000 with the M. Keck observatory discovered another body
next to T Tau S. This was called T Tau Sb, and T Tau S was renamed to T Tau Sa.
Other Stuff:
● Chosen as prototype for T Tauri stars because it was the best studied, had clear
absorption and emission features to characterize the group and was the brightest
● From around its discovery to the 1920s it had variability of 3­4 magnitudes, and
the nebulae varied along with it. But in the 1920s the variability slowed down to a
mere 0.4 magnitude.
● Shows a property of face­on and edge­on disks where we can’t see all of the
spectra; called disk inclination.
● This results in a spectra including special absorption and emission lines for
silicates. This type of spectra is called a P Cygni profile.
● Eventually was found that the initial variability of T Tauri was due to movements
related between the three bodies.
● Resulted in a theory that all T Tauri stars start off as multiple star systems, but
one ejects the other stars farther away.
● Surrounded by Burnham’s nebula. This was formerly visible however it is not
anymore.

