Measuring the Properties of Stars (ch. 17)

Stars (and everything) are undoubtedly much more complex
than our descriptions of them.  Nevertheless, we will try to reduce
the nature of stars to a fairly small number of properties that can be
used in an attempt to answer questions like: Why do there appear
to be different “types” of stars?  How are stars born, evolve, and
die?  First we discuss how the properties of stars are measured and
how they can be interpreted (ch. 17).  Then we do the same for the
gas between the stars (the “interstellar medium,” ch. 18) and try to
put them together to understand how stars form.  Finally, in the
next section of the course we will consider in detail how stars of
different mass evolve from birth to death.

[Not on the exam: Discover 17-1, p. 441, More Precisely 17-1, p.
445; you should just have a basic idea of what the “magnitude
system” means when referring to stellar brightnesses.]

Basic properties
1. Distances.  The most basic method is to measure a star’s

parallax angle, a subject we already covered early in the course.
(See Fig. 17.1 for review.)  Recall that this method gives rise to the
unit of distance we will use throughout the remainder of the
course, the parsec, which is the distance of a star with a parallax of
one second of arc.  (The nearest stars are a few parsecs distant
from us, while our Galaxy is about 30,000 parsecs across.)  A
parsec is about 3 x 1018 cm, or over a hundred thousand times
larger than the distance from the Earth to the Sun (1AU).

Distance (in parsecs) is equal to the inverse of the
parallax angle (expressed in seconds of arcs).

For example, a star 10 pc distant has a parallax angle of 0.1
seconds of arc.  Distant stars have such small parallax angles that
they cannot be measured (recall our discussion of the diffraction
and seeing limits for telescopes).  So there is a distance limit for
this method.



The Hipparcos space mission revolutionized our knowledge
of parallaxes.  Read “Discovery 17-2” on p. 454 on this topic.
Planned future space missions (around 2010; SIM and GAIA) aim
to enormously extend the distances to which parallaxes can be
measured, covering our entire Galaxy.

Important to note: Most objects we’ll encounter in astronomy
are too far away to get distances by parallax, so we have to use
other, less direct measurements (the idea of “standard candles” is
the most important).  But parallax is crucial because it serves as the
calibration of all these other methods; it is the “yardstick” upon
which other distance measurements are based.

2. Motions.   We already know how to measure the
component of star’s motion along our line of sight, called the
radial velocity:  obtain a spectrum and measure the Doppler shift
using spectral lines.  But the star also has a component across our
line of sight; this is called the transverse velocity.  All we can
directly measure is the angular speed across our line of sight
(“proper motion”); in order to get the transverse velocity, we also
need the distance.  (Think about mosquito/UFO used in class.)
What kind of star do you expect to exhibit the largest proper
motion?

When you combine the two components of velocity, you get
the total space velocity of the star.

We won’t use this information much until we get to topics
like the origin of our galaxy and the evidence for “dark matter.”
But you should still know that most stars in the disk of our Galaxy
are moving at around 5 to 50 km/ sec.



3. Luminosities.   This is how much energy a star is emitting
per unit time, i.e. the rate at which photon energy is being emitted.
It is exactly the same as the power of a light bulb in Watts.  You
can think of it as the absolute brightness of the star, to distinguish
it from how much energy an observer is receiving from the star, its
apparent brightness, which obviously depends on the star’s
distance.   The three quantities are related by the inverse square
law of light:

apparent brightness ∝ luminosity/(distance)2

Since apparent brightness is EASY to measure (if you can see
something, you can measure how bright it appears), and we can get
distance, at least for some stars, from parallax, we can solve this
for L.  Examples given in class should make this clear if it’s not
already.

[You do NOT have to know anything about “magnitude
scales” except the basic idea.  I won’t use this idea on the exam,
but if you encounter it in the book, just remember that it’s just a
handy way to assign numbers to apparent brightness and
luminosity that have a smaller range, like the Richter scale for
earthquakes.]

4. Temperature.   We are talking about the photospheric
temperature, which is all we can directly observe.  There are 2
ways to get T:

a. Color—remember Wien’s law?  Even though stars aren’t
perfect blackbodies, we can get fairly accurate temperatures
(especially in a relative sense) by colors.  See p. 446-7, esp. Fig.
17.9, so that you understand “color” as a measure of how much
energy is being radiated in two different wavelength bands.

b. Spectra and spectral classification—We’ve already
discussed how the strengths of spectral lines of different elements
are extremely sensitive to the temperature of the gas.  E.g. if



helium lines, star’s photosphere must be really hot, since it takes so
much energy to excite its electron levels.  Look carefully at Fig.
17.10 to see how different absorption lines appear for stars of
different temperatures.

Astronomers have classified stars into spectral types that turn
out to be a temperature sequence in the order

O B A F G K M  ⇒ memorize this
50,000K ………………..6,000K…….3,000K ← temperature
HeII     HeI H   various metals      molecules        ← strongest lines

5. Sizes.  Since stars only appear as points of light to even the
largest telescopes (with a very few exceptions, using
interferometry for the largest nearby stars: see Fig. 17.11 for the
best example), we can’t get their diameters directly.  Instead we
use a method that is based on Stefan’s law (see ch.3 if you have
forgotten): The rate of emission of energy of all light, at all
wavelengths,  by an object, by a unit area of its surface,  per unit
time (e.g. per second), E, is proportional to the fourth power of the
surface (photospheric) temperature T4.  Writing L for the
luminosity (total energy emitted per unit time by the whole object)
of the object (we’ll see how to measure this shortly), and noting
that the area of a star is proportional to the square of its radius, this
gives

E ∝ L / R2 ∝ T4 ; or   L ∝ T4 R2.
You can see there are two ways for a star to be luminous:  have a
high temperature  and/or have a large surface area.  This means
that if we can measure the temperature (from color, or using
spectral lines; see below), we can get the surface area, i.e. the size
R:

R ∝  L1/2 / T2  .

Don’t worry much about the exponents, just understand the idea.



If you carry this out for a large number of stars (see Fig.
17.12), you find that most of them have R similar to the sun (these
are called “main sequence stars”), but a fraction of them are
either: (a) red giants – large L (up to 106 x sun) and small T (i.e.
red), so must have large size (up to 1000 x sun’s); (b) white
dwarfs – T fairly large (“white”), but faint, L only a few percent of
sun.  This means they must not have much surface area, i.e. their
sizes are tiny (comparable the size of the Earth!), even though their
masses are similar to the sun’s.  They must have huge densities!
(Later we’ll see what these classes represent in terms of evolution.)

NEXT: The HR diagram (extremely important)—read  sec.
17.5.



The H-R diagram (sec. 17.5)

The H-R diagram is a graph of luminosity vs.
temperature for individual stars.  This will be our basic
device for describing the evolution of stars so it is
important to be comfortable with it.  [Notice that
temperature increases from right to left.  Also note that
stars evolve on timescales of at least millions of years, so
we don’t see them move around in this diagram.  We watch
models of stars move around.  More in later chapters.]

Understand from earlier notes why stars in the upper
right of this diagram must have large sizes (red giants)
while those in the lower left (white dwarfs) must be small
(white dwarfs).

Also read why plotting only the stars that are
apparently the brightest would be very misleading.  We
need to plot all the stars out to some distance.  The
textbook has some useful graphs (pp. 452, 453) illustrating
this point.

If we use a complete sample of stars we find:
~90% main sequence (MS) stars
~1%  red giants
~9%  white dwarfs

Why? That’s the purpose of stellar evolution theory, but
you can already guess a couple of possible answers.
You should be comfortable answering the “Concept
Check” on p. 455 if you understand this.



Spectroscopic Parallax

If you can establish that a star is a main sequence
(MS) star (and you can—from its spectrum; see
“luminosity class” in text), then the spectral type gives you
the temperature, so you can just read off the luminosity
from the H-R diagram.

Knowing the apparent brightness (really easy to
measure) and luminosity, this gives the distance (review
earlier material if you don’t understand this), without
having to get a trigonometric parallax.  Distances obtained
in this way are called “spectroscopic parallaxes.”  (In
“spectroscopic parallax” the word parallax is just used to
mean “distance.”)

You can get distances out to roughly 10,000 pc (10
kiloparsecs) using this method.  (Compared to about 500 pc
for trigonometric parallax.)

This is our first example of using a “standard
candle”:  some property of the star (in this case its
temperature) gives you its luminosity (hence the analogy
with a candle or light bulb).



Stellar Masses
The only method for directly determining the masses

of stars is from binary stars, using Newton’s form of
Kepler’s 3rd law.  There are three types of binary stars,
which depend on how close they are to each other, their
relative brightnesses, the distance of the binary, and other
factors:

a.Visual binaries—can see both stars, and so monitor
orbit directly.  (But must be near enough for you to resolve
the two stars—not that many of these!)  See Fig. 17.19.
Notice that you need the distance to convert the angular
separation of the binary pair into a linear separation (i.e. in
km or AU).

b.Spectroscopic binaries—in this case you might see
one or both stars, but the way you can tell they are in orbit
is by observing periodic changes in the Doppler shift of
their spectral lines.  See Fig. 17.20.  The period of the
radial velocity variation is the period of the system.  Using
this, you can estimate the semimajor axis (for a circular
orbit, the period = 2π x orbital radius/orbital velocity).  So
with period and semimajor axis, can get masses (actually
only lower limit—inclination; see text).

Recall that this is how extrasolar planets were
discovered (the “radial velocity method”).



c. Eclipsing binaries – only get eclipses if the orbit is
very nearly along the observer’s line of sight, i.e. edge-on
(so favors very small orbits), but can get lots of
information, even the sizes of the stars, from the light
curve.  (See Fig. 17.21)

Recall that this is the basis for the “transit method”
that we discussed in relation to extrasolar planet detection.

Generally, get only limits on stars’ masses, but in
many cases (e.g. spectroscopic eclipsing binaries) can get
actual masses.  See pp. 459-460.

Results: accurate masses for ~ 100 stars, showing that
they span the mass range ~ 0.1 to 50-100 solar masses.
Why this range?  That is subject of future chapter, but for
now, the most important thing we learn from this is an
estimate of the lifetimes of stars, and how they depend on
mass.  This comes from:



The mass-luminosity relation for main sequence stars
(sec. 17.8).  Roughly, find from observations that L ∝ M3.
This tells us that the mass varies continuously along the
main sequence.  Range is roughly 50 solar masses
(luminous hot stars, spectral type O) to about 0.1 solar
masses (faint cool stars, spectral type M).  But notice strong
mass-dependence of luminosity!

Theory tells us that the mass a star is born with
determines nearly everything else about its fate.

Good example:
stellar lifetime = fuel supply/rate at which it is being
burned

      ∝ stellar mass / stellar luminosity
      ∝ M / M3 ∝ 1/M2

So low mass stars live the longest.  Numerically, find a
lifetime of about a few million years for 50 solar masses,
10 billion years for the sun, and about a trillion years (much
greater than the estimated age of our universe) for the
lowest mass stars.

Now stare at Table 17.5 (Measuring the Stars) and see if
it all makes sense to you.  Try the questions at the end of the
chapter before moving on!

Next (ch.18): try to understand the material from which stars form
(the interstellar medium) and how these forming stars can be
thought of as moving along a track in the H-R diagram before they
end up on the main sequence, where they will spend most of their
lives.  This idea of “evolutionary track” in the H-R diagram will be
central to most of the material in the next section of the course.