Planck's law
In physics, Planck's law (also Planck radiation law[1]: 1305 )
describes the spectral density of electromagnetic radiation
emitted by a black body in thermal equilibrium at a given
temperature T, when there is no net flow of matter or energy
between the body and its environment.[2]

At the end of the 19th century, physicists were unable to
explain why the observed spectrum of black-body radiation,
which by then had been accurately measured, diverged
significantly at higher frequencies from that predicted by
existing theories. In 1900, German physicist Max Planck Planck's law accurately describes black-
heuristically derived a formula for the observed spectrum by body radiation. Shown here are a family
assuming that a hypothetical electrically charged oscillator in of curves for different temperatures. The
a cavity that contained black-body radiation could only classical (black) curve diverges from

change its energy in a minimal increment, E, that was observed intensity at high frequencies

proportional to the frequency of its associated (short wavelengths). Formula in cgs units

electromagnetic wave. While Planck originally regarded the
hypothesis of dividing energy into increments as a mathematical artifice, introduced merely to get the
correct answer, other physicists including Albert Einstein built on his work, and Planck's insight is now
recognized to be of fundamental importance to quantum theory.

The law
Every physical body spontaneously and continuously emits electromagnetic radiation and the spectral
radiance of a body, Bν, describes the spectral emissive power per unit area, per unit solid angle and per
unit frequency for particular radiation frequencies. The relationship given by Planck's radiation law, given
below, shows that with increasing temperature, the total radiated energy of a body increases and the peak
of the emitted spectrum shifts to shorter wavelengths.[3] According to Planck's distribution law, the
spectral energy density (energy per unit volume per unit frequency) at given temperature is given by (SI
units):[4][5]

alternatively, the law can be expressed for the spectral radiance of a body for frequency ν at absolute
temperature T (in cgs units) given as:[6][7][8]



where kB is the Boltzmann constant, h is the Planck constant, and c is the speed of light in the medium,
whether material or vacuum. The cgs units of spectral radiance Bν are erg·s−1·sr−1·cm−2·Hz−1. The terms

B and u are related to each other by a factor of  4π
c  since B is independent of direction and radiation

travels at speed c. The spectral radiance can also be expressed per unit wavelength λ instead of per unit
frequency. In addition, the law may be expressed in other terms, such as the number of photons emitted at
a certain wavelength, or the energy density in a volume of radiation.

In the limit of low frequencies (i.e. long wavelengths), Planck's law tends to the Rayleigh–Jeans law,
while in the limit of high frequencies (i.e. small wavelengths) it tends to the Wien approximation.

Max Planck developed the law in 1900 with only empirically determined constants, and later showed
that, expressed as an energy distribution, it is the unique stable distribution for radiation in
thermodynamic equilibrium.[2] As an energy distribution, it is one of a family of thermal equilibrium
distributions which include the Bose–Einstein distribution, the Fermi–Dirac distribution and the
Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution.

Black-body radiation
A black-body is an idealised object which absorbs and emits
all radiation frequencies. Near thermodynamic equilibrium,
the emitted radiation is closely described by Planck's law and
because of its dependence on temperature, Planck radiation is
said to be thermal radiation, such that the higher the
temperature of a body the more radiation it emits at every
wavelength.

Planck radiation has a maximum intensity at a wavelength
that depends on the temperature of the body. For example, at

The Sun approximates a black body
room temperature (~300 K), a body emits thermal radiation radiator. Its effective temperature is about
that is mostly infrared and invisible. At higher temperatures 5777 K.
the amount of infrared radiation increases and can be felt as
heat, and more visible radiation is emitted so the body glows
visibly red. At higher temperatures, the body is bright yellow or blue-white and emits significant amounts
of short wavelength radiation, including ultraviolet and even x-rays. The surface of the Sun (~6000 K)
emits large amounts of both infrared and ultraviolet radiation; its emission is peaked in the visible
spectrum. This shift due to temperature is called Wien's displacement law.

Planck radiation is the greatest amount of radiation that any body at thermal equilibrium can emit from its
surface, whatever its chemical composition or surface structure.[9] The passage of radiation across an
interface between media can be characterized by the emissivity of the interface (the ratio of the actual
radiance to the theoretical Planck radiance), usually denoted by the symbol ε. It is in general dependent
on chemical composition and physical structure, on temperature, on the wavelength, on the angle of
passage, and on the polarization.[10] The emissivity of a natural interface is always between ε = 0 and 1.



A body that interfaces with another medium which both has ε = 1 and absorbs all the radiation incident
upon it, is said to be a black body. The surface of a black body can be modelled by a small hole in the
wall of a large enclosure which is maintained at a uniform temperature with opaque walls that, at every
wavelength, are not perfectly reflective. At equilibrium, the radiation inside this enclosure is described by
Planck's law, as is the radiation leaving the small hole.

Just as the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution is the unique maximum entropy energy distribution for a gas
of material particles at thermal equilibrium, so is Planck's distribution for a gas of photons.[11][12] By
contrast to a material gas where the masses and number of particles play a role, the spectral radiance,
pressure and energy density of a photon gas at thermal equilibrium are entirely determined by the
temperature.

If the photon gas is not Planckian, the second law of thermodynamics guarantees that interactions
(between photons and other particles or even, at sufficiently high temperatures, between the photons
themselves) will cause the photon energy distribution to change and approach the Planck distribution. In
such an approach to thermodynamic equilibrium, photons are created or annihilated in the right numbers
and with the right energies to fill the cavity with a Planck distribution until they reach the equilibrium
temperature. It is as if the gas is a mixture of sub-gases, one for every band of wavelengths, and each sub-
gas eventually attains the common temperature.

The quantity Bν(ν, T) is the spectral radiance as a function of temperature and frequency. It has units of
W·m−2·sr−1·Hz−1 in the SI system. An infinitesimal amount of power Bν(ν, T) cos θ dA dΩ dν is
radiated in the direction described by the angle θ from the surface normal from infinitesimal surface area
dA into infinitesimal solid angle dΩ in an infinitesimal frequency band of width dν centered on
frequency ν. The total power radiated into any solid angle is the integral of Bν(ν, T) over those three
quantities, and is given by the Stefan–Boltzmann law. The spectral radiance of Planckian radiation from a
black body has the same value for every direction and angle of polarization, and so the black body is said
to be a Lambertian radiator.

Different forms
Planck's law can be encountered in several forms depending on the conventions and preferences of
different scientific fields. The various forms of the law for spectral radiance are summarized in the table
below. Forms on the left are most often encountered in experimental fields, while those on the right are
most often encountered in theoretical fields.



Radiance expressed in terms of different spectral variables[13][14][15][16]

with h with ħ
variable distribution variable distribution

Frequency Angular
ν frequency

ω

Wavelength Angular
λ wavelength

y

Wavenumber Angular
ν̃ wavenumber

k
Fractional
bandwidth

ln x

In the fractional bandwidth formulation, , and the integration is with respect to
.

Planck's law can also be written in terms of the spectral energy density (u) by multiplying B by  4π
c  :[17]

Spectral energy density expressed in terms of different spectral variables [5]

with h with ħ
variable distribution variable distribution

Frequency Angular
ν frequency

ω

Wavelength Angular
λ wavelength

y

Wavenumber Angular
ν̃ wavenumber

k
Fractional
bandwidth

ln x

These distributions represent the spectral radiance of blackbodies—the power emitted from the emitting
surface, per unit projected area of emitting surface, per unit solid angle, per spectral unit (frequency,
wavelength, wavenumber or their angular equivalents, or fractional frequency or wavelength). Since the



radiance is isotropic (i.e. independent of direction), the power emitted at an angle to the normal is
proportional to the projected area, and therefore to the cosine of that angle as per Lambert's cosine law,
and is unpolarized.

Correspondence between spectral variable forms
Different spectral variables require different corresponding forms of expression of the law. In general, one
may not convert between the various forms of Planck's law simply by substituting one variable for
another, because this would not take into account that the different forms have different units. Wavelength
and frequency units are reciprocal.

Corresponding forms of expression are related because they express one and the same physical fact: for a
particular physical spectral increment, a corresponding particular physical energy increment is radiated.

This is so whether it is expressed in terms of an increment of frequency, dν, or, correspondingly, of
wavelength, dλ, or of fractional bandwidth, dν/ν or dλ/λ. Introduction of a minus sign can indicate that
an increment of frequency corresponds with decrement of wavelength.

In order to convert the corresponding forms so that they express the same quantity in the same units we
multiply by the spectral increment. Then, for a particular spectral increment, the particular physical
energy increment may be written

which leads to

Also, ν(λ) =  cλ  , so that  dν c
dλ  = −  λ2  . Substitution gives the correspondence between the frequency and

wavelength forms, with their different dimensions and units.[15][18] Consequently,

Evidently, the location of the peak of the spectral distribution for Planck's law depends on the choice of
spectral variable. Nevertheless, in a manner of speaking, this formula means that the shape of the spectral
distribution is independent of temperature, according to Wien's displacement law, as detailed below in §
Properties §§ Percentiles.

The fractional bandwidth form is related to the other forms by[16]

.

First and second radiation constants
In the above variants of Planck's law, the wavelength and wavenumber variants use the terms 2hc2 and
hc
k  which comprise physical constants only. Consequently, these terms can be considered as physical

B
constants themselves,[19] and are therefore referred to as the first radiation constant c1L and the second



radiation constant c2 with

c1L = 2hc2

and

c2 = hc
k  .

B

Using the radiation constants, the wavelength variant of Planck's law can be simplified to

and the wavenumber variant can be simplified correspondingly.

L is used here instead of B because it is the SI symbol for spectral radiance. The L in c1L refers to that.
This reference is necessary because Planck's law can be reformulated to give spectral radiant exitance
M(λ, T) rather than spectral radiance L(λ, T), in which case c1 replaces c1L, with

c1 = 2πhc2,
so that Planck's law for spectral radiant exitance can be written as

As measuring techniques have improved, the General Conference on Weights and Measures has revised
its estimate of c2; see Planckian locus § International Temperature Scale for details.

Physics
Planck's law describes the unique and characteristic spectral
distribution for electromagnetic radiation in thermodynamic
equilibrium, when there is no net flow of matter or energy.[2]

Its physics is most easily understood by considering the
radiation in a cavity with rigid opaque walls. Motion of the
walls can affect the radiation. If the walls are not opaque, then
the thermodynamic equilibrium is not isolated. It is of interest
to explain how the thermodynamic equilibrium is attained.
There are two main cases: (a) when the approach to
thermodynamic equilibrium is in the presence of matter, when Freeze-out of high-energy oscillators

the walls of the cavity are imperfectly reflective for every
wavelength or when the walls are perfectly reflective while
the cavity contains a small black body (this was the main case considered by Planck); or (b) when the
approach to equilibrium is in the absence of matter, when the walls are perfectly reflective for all
wavelengths and the cavity contains no matter. For matter not enclosed in such a cavity, thermal radiation
can be approximately explained by appropriate use of Planck's law.



Classical physics led, via the equipartition theorem, to the ultraviolet catastrophe, a prediction that the
total blackbody radiation intensity was infinite. If supplemented by the classically unjustifiable
assumption that for some reason the radiation is finite, classical thermodynamics provides an account of
some aspects of the Planck distribution, such as the Stefan–Boltzmann law, and the Wien displacement
law. For the case of the presence of matter, quantum mechanics provides a good account, as found below
in the section headed Einstein coefficients. This was the case considered by Einstein, and is nowadays
used for quantum optics.[20][21] For the case of the absence of matter, quantum field theory is necessary,
because non-relativistic quantum mechanics with fixed particle numbers does not provide a sufficient
account.

Photons
Quantum theoretical explanation of Planck's law views the radiation as a gas of massless, uncharged,
bosonic particles, namely photons, in thermodynamic equilibrium. Photons are viewed as the carriers of
the electromagnetic interaction between electrically charged elementary particles. Photon numbers are not
conserved. Photons are created or annihilated in the right numbers and with the right energies to fill the
cavity with the Planck distribution. For a photon gas in thermodynamic equilibrium, the internal energy
density is entirely determined by the temperature; moreover, the pressure is entirely determined by the
internal energy density. This is unlike the case of thermodynamic equilibrium for material gases, for
which the internal energy is determined not only by the temperature, but also, independently, by the
respective numbers of the different molecules, and independently again, by the specific characteristics of
the different molecules. For different material gases at given temperature, the pressure and internal energy
density can vary independently, because different molecules can carry independently different excitation
energies.

Planck's law arises as a limit of the Bose–Einstein distribution, the energy distribution describing non-
interactive bosons in thermodynamic equilibrium. In the case of massless bosons such as photons and
gluons, the chemical potential is zero and the Bose–Einstein distribution reduces to the Planck
distribution. There is another fundamental equilibrium energy distribution: the Fermi–Dirac distribution,
which describes fermions, such as electrons, in thermal equilibrium. The two distributions differ because
multiple bosons can occupy the same quantum state, while multiple fermions cannot. At low densities, the
number of available quantum states per particle is large, and this difference becomes irrelevant. In the
low density limit, the Bose–Einstein and the Fermi–Dirac distribution each reduce to the Maxwell–
Boltzmann distribution.

Kirchhoff's law of thermal radiation
Kirchhoff's law of thermal radiation is a succinct and brief account of a complicated physical situation.
The following is an introductory sketch of that situation, and is very far from being a rigorous physical
argument. The purpose here is only to summarize the main physical factors in the situation, and the main
conclusions.

Spectral dependence of thermal radiation
There is a difference between conductive heat transfer and radiative heat transfer. Radiative heat transfer
can be filtered to pass only a definite band of radiative frequencies.

It is generally known that the hotter a body becomes, the more heat it radiates at every frequency.



In a cavity in an opaque body with rigid walls that are not perfectly reflective at any frequency, in
thermodynamic equilibrium, there is only one temperature, and it must be shared in common by the
radiation of every frequency.

One may imagine two such cavities, each in its own isolated radiative and thermodynamic equilibrium.
One may imagine an optical device that allows radiative heat transfer between the two cavities, filtered to
pass only a definite band of radiative frequencies. If the values of the spectral radiances of the radiations
in the cavities differ in that frequency band, heat may be expected to pass from the hotter to the colder.
One might propose to use such a filtered transfer of heat in such a band to drive a heat engine. If the two
bodies are at the same temperature, the second law of thermodynamics does not allow the heat engine to
work. It may be inferred that for a temperature common to the two bodies, the values of the spectral
radiances in the pass-band must also be common. This must hold for every frequency band.[22][23][24]

This became clear to Balfour Stewart and later to Kirchhoff. Balfour Stewart found experimentally that of
all surfaces, one of lamp-black emitted the greatest amount of thermal radiation for every quality of
radiation, judged by various filters.

Thinking theoretically, Kirchhoff went a little further, and pointed out that this implied that the spectral
radiance, as a function of radiative frequency, of any such cavity in thermodynamic equilibrium must be a
unique universal function of temperature. He postulated an ideal black body that interfaced with its
surrounds in just such a way as to absorb all the radiation that falls on it. By the Helmholtz reciprocity
principle, radiation from the interior of such a body would pass unimpeded, directly to its surrounds
without reflection at the interface. In thermodynamic equilibrium, the thermal radiation emitted from
such a body would have that unique universal spectral radiance as a function of temperature. This insight
is the root of Kirchhoff's law of thermal radiation.

Relation between absorptivity and emissivity
One may imagine a small homogeneous spherical material body labeled X at a temperature TX, lying in a
radiation field within a large cavity with walls of material labeled Y at a temperature TY. The body X
emits its own thermal radiation. At a particular frequency ν, the radiation emitted from a particular cross-
section through the centre of X in one sense in a direction normal to that cross-section may be denoted
Iν,X(TX), characteristically for the material of X. At that frequency ν, the radiative power from the walls
into that cross-section in the opposite sense in that direction may be denoted Iν,Y(TY), for the wall
temperature TY. For the material of X, defining the absorptivity αν,X,Y(TX, TY) as the fraction of that
incident radiation absorbed by X, that incident energy is absorbed at a rate αν,X,Y(TX, TY) Iν,Y(TY).

The rate q(ν,TX,TY) of accumulation of energy in one sense into the cross-section of the body can then
be expressed

Kirchhoff's seminal insight, mentioned just above, was that, at thermodynamic equilibrium at temperature
T, there exists a unique universal radiative distribution, nowadays denoted Bν(T), that is independent of
the chemical characteristics of the materials X and Y, that leads to a very valuable understanding of the
radiative exchange equilibrium of any body at all, as follows.



When there is thermodynamic equilibrium at temperature T, the cavity radiation from the walls has that
unique universal value, so that Iν,Y(TY) = Bν(T). Further, one may define the emissivity εν,X(TX) of the
material of the body X just so that at thermodynamic equilibrium at temperature TX = T, one has
Iν,X(TX) = Iν,X(T) = εν,X(T) Bν(T).

When thermal equilibrium prevails at temperature T = TX = TY, the rate of accumulation of energy
vanishes so that q(ν,TX,TY) = 0. It follows that in thermodynamic equilibrium, when T = TX = TY,

Kirchhoff pointed out that it follows that in thermodynamic equilibrium, when T = TX = TY,

Introducing the special notation αν,X(T) for the absorptivity of material X at thermodynamic equilibrium
at temperature T (justified by a discovery of Einstein, as indicated below), one further has the equality

at thermodynamic equilibrium.

The equality of absorptivity and emissivity here demonstrated is specific for thermodynamic equilibrium
at temperature T and is in general not to be expected to hold when conditions of thermodynamic
equilibrium do not hold. The emissivity and absorptivity are each separately properties of the molecules
of the material but they depend differently upon the distributions of states of molecular excitation on the
occasion, because of a phenomenon known as "stimulated emission", that was discovered by Einstein. On
occasions when the material is in thermodynamic equilibrium or in a state known as local thermodynamic
equilibrium, the emissivity and absorptivity become equal. Very strong incident radiation or other factors
can disrupt thermodynamic equilibrium or local thermodynamic equilibrium. Local thermodynamic
equilibrium in a gas means that molecular collisions far outweigh light emission and absorption in
determining the distributions of states of molecular excitation.

Kirchhoff pointed out that he did not know the precise character of Bν(T), but he thought it important
that it should be found out. Four decades after Kirchhoff's insight of the general principles of its existence
and character, Planck's contribution was to determine the precise mathematical expression of that
equilibrium distribution Bν(T).

Black body
In physics, one considers an ideal black body, here labeled B, defined as one that completely absorbs all
of the electromagnetic radiation falling upon it at every frequency ν (hence the term "black"). According
to Kirchhoff's law of thermal radiation, this entails that, for every frequency ν, at thermodynamic
equilibrium at temperature T, one has αν,B(T) = εν,B(T) = 1, so that the thermal radiation from a black
body is always equal to the full amount specified by Planck's law. No physical body can emit thermal
radiation that exceeds that of a black body, since if it were in equilibrium with a radiation field, it would
be emitting more energy than was incident upon it.



Though perfectly black materials do not exist, in practice a black surface can be accurately
approximated.[2] As to its material interior, a body of condensed matter, liquid, solid, or plasma, with a
definite interface with its surroundings, is completely black to radiation if it is completely opaque. That
means that it absorbs all of the radiation that penetrates the interface of the body with its surroundings,
and enters the body. This is not too difficult to achieve in practice. On the other hand, a perfectly black
interface is not found in nature. A perfectly black interface reflects no radiation, but transmits all that falls
on it, from either side. The best practical way to make an effectively black interface is to simulate an
'interface' by a small hole in the wall of a large cavity in a completely opaque rigid body of material that
does not reflect perfectly at any frequency, with its walls at a controlled temperature. Beyond these
requirements, the component material of the walls is unrestricted. Radiation entering the hole has almost
no possibility of escaping the cavity without being absorbed by multiple impacts with its walls.[25]

Lambert's cosine law
As explained by Planck,[26] a radiating body has an interior consisting of matter, and an interface with its
contiguous neighbouring material medium, which is usually the medium from within which the radiation
from the surface of the body is observed. The interface is not composed of physical matter but is a
theoretical conception, a mathematical two-dimensional surface, a joint property of the two contiguous
media, strictly speaking belonging to neither separately. Such an interface can neither absorb nor emit,
because it is not composed of physical matter; but it is the site of reflection and transmission of radiation,
because it is a surface of discontinuity of optical properties. The reflection and transmission of radiation
at the interface obey the Stokes–Helmholtz reciprocity principle.

At any point in the interior of a black body located inside a cavity in thermodynamic equilibrium at
temperature T the radiation is homogeneous, isotropic and unpolarized. A black body absorbs all and
reflects none of the electromagnetic radiation incident upon it. According to the Helmholtz reciprocity
principle, radiation from the interior of a black body is not reflected at its surface, but is fully transmitted
to its exterior. Because of the isotropy of the radiation in the body's interior, the spectral radiance of
radiation transmitted from its interior to its exterior through its surface is independent of direction.[27]

This is expressed by saying that radiation from the surface of a black body in thermodynamic equilibrium
obeys Lambert's cosine law.[28][29] This means that the spectral flux dΦ(dA, θ, dΩ, dν) from a given
infinitesimal element of area dA of the actual emitting surface of the black body, detected from a given
direction that makes an angle θ with the normal to the actual emitting surface at dA, into an element of
solid angle of detection dΩ centred on the direction indicated by θ, in an element of frequency
bandwidth dν, can be represented as[30]

where L0(dA, dν) denotes the flux, per unit area per unit frequency per unit solid angle, that area dA
would show if it were measured in its normal direction θ = 0.

The factor cos θ is present because the area to which the spectral radiance refers directly is the
projection, of the actual emitting surface area, onto a plane perpendicular to the direction indicated by θ .
This is the reason for the name cosine law.



Taking into account the independence of direction of the spectral radiance of radiation from the surface of
a black body in thermodynamic equilibrium, one has L0(dA, dν) = Bν(T) and so

Thus Lambert's cosine law expresses the independence of direction of the spectral radiance Bν (T) of the
surface of a black body in thermodynamic equilibrium.

Stefan–Boltzmann law
The total power emitted per unit area at the surface of a black body (P) may be found by integrating the
black body spectral flux found from Lambert's law over all frequencies, and over the solid angles
corresponding to a hemisphere (h) above the surface.

The infinitesimal solid angle can be expressed in spherical polar coordinates:

So that:

where

is known as the Stefan–Boltzmann constant.[31]

Radiative transfer
The equation of radiative transfer describes the way in which radiation is affected as it travels through a
material medium. For the special case in which the material medium is in thermodynamic equilibrium in
the neighborhood of a point in the medium, Planck's law is of special importance.

For simplicity, we can consider the linear steady state, without scattering. The equation of radiative
transfer states that for a beam of light going through a small distance ds, energy is conserved: The change
in the (spectral) radiance of that beam (Iν) is equal to the amount removed by the material medium plus
the amount gained from the material medium. If the radiation field is in equilibrium with the material
medium, these two contributions will be equal. The material medium will have a certain emission
coefficient and absorption coefficient.

The absorption coefficient α is the fractional change in the intensity of the light beam as it travels the
distance ds, and has units of length−1. It is composed of two parts, the decrease due to absorption and the
increase due to stimulated emission. Stimulated emission is emission by the material body which is
caused by and is proportional to the incoming radiation. It is included in the absorption term because, like



absorption, it is proportional to the intensity of the incoming radiation. Since the amount of absorption
will generally vary linearly as the density ρ of the material, we may define a "mass absorption
coefficient" κν =  αρ  which is a property of the material itself. The change in intensity of a light beam due
to absorption as it traverses a small distance ds will then be[7]

The "mass emission coefficient" jν is equal to the radiance per unit volume of a small volume element
divided by its mass (since, as for the mass absorption coefficient, the emission is proportional to the
emitting mass) and has units of power⋅solid angle−1

⋅frequency−1
⋅density−1. Like the mass absorption

coefficient, it too is a property of the material itself. The change in a light beam as it traverses a small
distance ds will then be[32]

The equation of radiative transfer will then be the sum of these two contributions:[33]

If the radiation field is in equilibrium with the material medium, then the radiation will be homogeneous
(independent of position) so that dIν = 0 and:

which is another statement of Kirchhoff's law, relating two material properties of the medium, and which
yields the radiative transfer equation at a point around which the medium is in thermodynamic
equilibrium:

Einstein coefficients
The principle of detailed balance states that, at thermodynamic equilibrium, each elementary process is
equilibrated by its reverse process.

In 1916, Albert Einstein applied this principle on an atomic level to the case of an atom radiating and
absorbing radiation due to transitions between two particular energy levels,[34] giving a deeper insight
into the equation of radiative transfer and Kirchhoff's law for this type of radiation. If level 1 is the lower
energy level with energy E1, and level 2 is the upper energy level with energy E2, then the frequency ν
of the radiation radiated or absorbed will be determined by Bohr's frequency condition:[35][36]

If n1 and n2 are the number densities of the atom in states 1 and 2 respectively, then the rate of change of
these densities in time will be due to three processes:

Spontaneous emission



Stimulated emission

Photo-absorption

where uν is the spectral energy density of the radiation field. The three parameters A21, B21 and B12,
known as the Einstein coefficients, are associated with the photon frequency ν produced by the transition
between two energy levels (states). As a result, each line in a spectrum has its own set of associated
coefficients. When the atoms and the radiation field are in equilibrium, the radiance will be given by
Planck's law and, by the principle of detailed balance, the sum of these rates must be zero:

Since the atoms are also in equilibrium, the populations of the two levels are related by the Boltzmann
factor:

where g1 and g2 are the multiplicities of the respective energy levels. Combining the above two
equations with the requirement that they be valid at any temperature yields two relationships between the
Einstein coefficients:

so that knowledge of one coefficient will yield the other two.

For the case of isotropic absorption and emission, the emission coefficient (jν) and absorption coefficient
(κν) defined in the radiative transfer section above, can be expressed in terms of the Einstein coefficients.
The relationships between the Einstein coefficients will yield the expression of Kirchhoff's law expressed
in the Radiative transfer section above, namely that

These coefficients apply to both atoms and molecules.

Properties

Peaks



The distributions Bν, Bω, Bν ̃and Bk peak at a photon energy of[37]

where W is the Lambert W function and e is Euler's number.

However, the distribution Bλ peaks at a different energy[37]

The reason for this is that, as mentioned above, one cannot go from (for example) Bν to Bλ simply by
substituting ν by λ. In addition, one must also multiply by , which shifts the peak of the
distribution to higher energies. These peaks are the mode energy of a photon, when binned using equal-
size bins of frequency or wavelength, respectively. Dividing hc (14 387.770 μm·K) by these energy
expression gives the wavelength of the peak.

The spectral radiance at these peaks is given by:

with  and

with 

Meanwhile, the average energy of a photon from a blackbody is

where  is the Riemann zeta function.

Approximations
In the limit of low frequencies (i.e. long wavelengths), Planck's law becomes the Rayleigh–Jeans
law[38][39][40]

or



The radiance increases as the square of the frequency,
illustrating the ultraviolet catastrophe. In the limit of high
frequencies (i.e. small wavelengths) Planck's law tends to the
Wien approximation:[40][41][42]

or

Log-log plots of radiance vs. frequency
for Planck's law (green), compared with

Percentiles the Rayleigh–Jeans law (red) and the
Wien approximation (blue) for a black

Wien's displacement law in its stronger form states that the body at 8 mK temperature.
shape of Planck's law is independent of temperature. It is
therefore possible to list the percentile points of the total
radiation as well as the peaks for wavelength and frequency, in a Percentile λT (μm·K) λkBT/hc
form which gives the wavelength λ when divided by temperature
T.[43] The second column of the following table lists the 0.01% 910 0.0632

corresponding values of λT, that is, those values of x for which the 0.1% 1110 0.0771

wavelength λ is  xT  micrometers at the radiance percentile point given 1% 1448 0.1006

by the corresponding entry in the first column. 10% 2195 0.1526

20% 2676 0.1860

That is, 0.01% of the radiation is at a wavelength below  910
T  μm, 25.0% 2898 0.2014

20% below  2676
T  μm, etc. The wavelength and frequency peaks are 30% 3119 0.2168

40% 3582 0.2490
in bold and occur at 25.0% and 64.6% respectively. The 41.8% point
is the wavelength-frequency-neutral peak (i.e. the peak in power per 41.8% 3670 0.2551

unit change in logarithm of wavelength or frequency). These are the 50% 4107 0.2855
1 2

points at which the respective Planck-law functions  λ5  , ν3 ν
 and  λ2  , 60% 4745 0.3298

64.6% 5099 0.3544
respectively, divided by exp( hν

kBT  ) − 1 attain their maxima. The 70% 5590 0.3885

much smaller gap in ratio of wavelengths between 0.1% and 0.01% 80% 6864 0.4771
(1110 is 22% more than 910) than between 99.9% and 99.99% 90% 9376 0.6517
(113374 is 120% more than 51613) reflects the exponential decay of
energy at short wavelengths (left end) and polynomial decay at long. 99% 22884 1.5905

99.9% 51613 3.5873
Which peak to use depends on the application. The conventional 99.99% 113374 7.8799
choice is the wavelength peak at 25.0% given by Wien's
displacement law in its weak form. For some purposes the median or
50% point dividing the total radiation into two-halves may be more suitable. The latter is closer to the



frequency peak than to the wavelength peak because the radiance drops exponentially at short
wavelengths and only polynomially at long. The neutral peak occurs at a shorter wavelength than the
median for the same reason.

Comparison to solar spectrum
Solar radiation can be compared to black-
body radiation at about 5778 K (but see
graph). The table on the right shows how the
radiation of a black body at this temperature is
partitioned, and also how sunlight is
partitioned for comparison. Also for
comparison a planet modeled as a black body
is shown, radiating at a nominal 288 K
(15 °C) as a representative value of the Earth's

Solar spectrum compared to black-body at 5775 K highly variable temperature. Its wavelengths
are more than twenty times that of the Sun,

tabulated in the third column in
micrometers (thousands of Percentile Sun λ (μm)[44] Black body at 5778K 288 K planet λ (μm)
nanometers). 0.01% 0.203 0.157 3.16

That is, only 1% of the Sun's 0.1% 0.235 0.192 3.85

radiation is at wavelengths 1% 0.296 0.251 5.03
shorter than 296 nm, and only 10% 0.415 0.380 7.62
1% at longer than 3728 nm. 20% 0.484 0.463 9.29
Expressed in micrometers this
puts 98% of the Sun's radiation 25.0% 0.520 0.502 10.1

in the range from 0.296 to 30% 0.556 .540 10.8

3.728 μm. The corresponding 41.8% 0.650 0.635 12.7
98% of energy radiated from a 50% 0.727 0.711 14.3
288 K planet is from 5.03 to
79.5 μm, well above the range 60% 0.844 0.821 16.5

of solar radiation (or below if 64.6% 0.911 0.882 17.7
expressed in terms of 70% 1.003 0.967 19.4

frequencies ν =  cλ  instead of 80% 1.242 1.188 23.8

wavelengths λ). 90% 1.666 1.623 32.6

99% 3.728 3.961 79.5
A consequence of this more-
than-order-of-magnitude 99.9% 8.208 8.933 179

difference in wavelength 99.99% 17.548 19.620 394
between solar and planetary
radiation is that filters designed to pass one and block the other are easy to construct. For example,
windows fabricated of ordinary glass or transparent plastic pass at least 80% of the incoming 5778 K
solar radiation, which is below 1.2 μm in wavelength, while blocking over 99% of the outgoing 288 K
thermal radiation from 5 μm upwards, wavelengths at which most kinds of glass and plastic of
construction-grade thickness are effectively opaque.



The Sun's radiation is that arriving at the top of the atmosphere (TOA). As can be read from the table,
radiation below 400 nm, or ultraviolet, is about 8%, while that above 700 nm, or infrared, starts at about
the 48% point and so accounts for 52% of the total. Hence only 40% of the TOA insolation is visible to
the human eye. The atmosphere shifts these percentages substantially in favor of visible light as it absorbs
most of the ultraviolet and significant amounts of infrared.

Derivations

Photon gas
Consider a cube of side L with conducting walls filled with electromagnetic radiation in thermal
equilibrium at temperature T. If there is a small hole in one of the walls, the radiation emitted from the
hole will be characteristic of a perfect black body. We will first calculate the spectral energy density
within the cavity and then determine the spectral radiance of the emitted radiation.

At the walls of the cube, the parallel component of the electric field and the orthogonal component of the
magnetic field must vanish. Analogous to the wave function of a particle in a box, one finds that the fields
are superpositions of periodic functions. The three wavelengths λ1, λ2, and λ3, in the three directions
orthogonal to the walls can be:

where the ni are positive integers. For each set of integers ni there are two linearly independent solutions
(known as modes). The two modes for each set of these ni correspond to the two polarization states of the
photon which has a spin of 1. According to quantum theory, the total energy of a mode is given by:

(1)

The number r can be interpreted as the number of photons in the mode. For r = 0 the energy of the mode
is not zero. This vacuum energy of the electromagnetic field is responsible for the Casimir effect. In the
following we will calculate the internal energy of the box at absolute temperature T.

According to statistical mechanics, the equilibrium probability distribution over the energy levels of a
particular mode is given by:

where we use the reciprocal temperature



The denominator Z(β), is the partition function of a single mode. It makes Pr properly normalized, and
can be evaluated as

with

(2)

being the energy of a single photon. The average energy in a mode can be obtained from the partition
function:

This formula, apart from the first vacuum energy term, is a special case of the general formula for
particles obeying Bose–Einstein statistics. Since there is no restriction on the total number of photons, the
chemical potential is zero.

If we measure the energy relative to the ground state, the total energy in the box follows by summing
⟨E⟩ −  ε2  over all allowed single photon states. This can be done exactly in the thermodynamic limit as L
approaches infinity. In this limit, ε becomes continuous and we can then integrate ⟨E⟩ − ε

2  over this
parameter. To calculate the energy in the box in this way, we need to evaluate how many photon states
there are in a given energy range. If we write the total number of single photon states with energies
between ε and ε + dε as g(ε) dε, where g(ε) is the density of states (which is evaluated below), then the
total energy is given by

(3)

To calculate the density of states we rewrite equation (2) as follows:

where n is the norm of the vector n = (n1, n2, n3).

For every vector n with integer components larger than or equal to zero, there are two photon states. This
means that the number of photon states in a certain region of n-space is twice the volume of that region.
An energy range of dε corresponds to shell of thickness dn =  2L

hc  dε in n-space. Because the components
of n have to be positive, this shell spans an octant of a sphere. The number of photon states g(ε) dε, in an
energy range dε, is thus given by:



Inserting this in Eq. (3) and dividing by volume V = L3 gives the total energy density

where the frequency-dependent spectral energy density uν(T) is given by

Since the radiation is the same in all directions, and propagates at the speed of light, the spectral radiance
of radiation exiting the small hole is

which yields the Planck's law

Other forms of the law can be obtained by change of variables in the total energy integral. The above
derivation is based on Brehm & Mullin 1989.

Dipole approximation and Einstein Coefficients
For the non-degenerate case, A and B coefficients can be calculated using dipole approximation in time
dependent perturbation theory in quantum mechanics. Calculation of A also requires second quantization
since semi-classical theory cannot explain spontaneous emission which does not go to zero as perturbing
field goes to zero. The transition rates hence calculated are (in SI units):[45][46][47]

Note that the rate of transition formula depends on dipole moment operator. For higher order
approximations, it involves quadrupole moment and other similar terms. The A and B coefficients (which
correspond to angular frequency energy distribution) are hence:



where  and A and B coefficients satisfy the given ratios for non degenerate case:

 and .

Another useful ratio is that from maxwell distribution which says that the number of particles in an
energy level  is proportional to the exponent of . Mathematically:

where  and  are number of occupied energy levels of  and  respectively, where .
Then, using:

Solving for  for equilibrium condition , and using the derived ratios, we get Planck's Law:

.

History

Balfour Stewart
In 1858, Balfour Stewart described his experiments on the thermal radiative emissive and absorptive
powers of polished plates of various substances, compared with the powers of lamp-black surfaces, at the
same temperature.[9] Stewart chose lamp-black surfaces as his reference because of various previous
experimental findings, especially those of Pierre Prevost and of John Leslie. He wrote "Lamp-black,
which absorbs all the rays that fall upon it, and therefore possesses the greatest possible absorbing power,
will possess also the greatest possible radiating power."

Stewart measured radiated power with a thermo-pile and sensitive galvanometer read with a microscope.
He was concerned with selective thermal radiation, which he investigated with plates of substances that
radiated and absorbed selectively for different qualities of radiation rather than maximally for all qualities
of radiation. He discussed the experiments in terms of rays which could be reflected and refracted, and
which obeyed the Helmholtz reciprocity principle (though he did not use an eponym for it). He did not in
this paper mention that the qualities of the rays might be described by their wavelengths, nor did he use
spectrally resolving apparatus such as prisms or diffraction gratings. His work was quantitative within
these constraints. He made his measurements in a room temperature environment, and quickly so as to
catch his bodies in a condition near the thermal equilibrium in which they had been prepared by heating
to equilibrium with boiling water. His measurements confirmed that substances that emit and absorb
selectively respect the principle of selective equality of emission and absorption at thermal equilibrium.



Stewart offered a theoretical proof that this should be the case separately for every selected quality of
thermal radiation, but his mathematics was not rigorously valid. According to historian D. M. Siegel: "He
was not a practitioner of the more sophisticated techniques of nineteenth-century mathematical physics;
he did not even make use of the functional notation in dealing with spectral distributions."[48] He made
no mention of thermodynamics in this paper, though he did refer to conservation of vis viva. He proposed
that his measurements implied that radiation was both absorbed and emitted by particles of matter
throughout depths of the media in which it propagated. He applied the Helmholtz reciprocity principle to
account for the material interface processes as distinct from the processes in the interior material. He
concluded that his experiments showed that, in the interior of an enclosure in thermal equilibrium, the
radiant heat, reflected and emitted combined, leaving any part of the surface, regardless of its substance,
was the same as would have left that same portion of the surface if it had been composed of lamp-black.
He did not mention the possibility of ideally perfectly reflective walls; in particular he noted that highly
polished real physical metals absorb very slightly.

Gustav Kirchhoff
In 1859, not knowing of Stewart's work, Gustav Robert Kirchhoff reported the coincidence of the
wavelengths of spectrally resolved lines of absorption and of emission of visible light. Importantly for
thermal physics, he also observed that bright lines or dark lines were apparent depending on the
temperature difference between emitter and absorber.[49]

Kirchhoff then went on to consider bodies that emit and absorb heat radiation, in an opaque enclosure or
cavity, in equilibrium at temperature T.

Here is used a notation different from Kirchhoff's. Here, the emitting power E(T, i) denotes a
dimensioned quantity, the total radiation emitted by a body labeled by index i at temperature T. The total
absorption ratio a(T, i) of that body is dimensionless, the ratio of absorbed to incident radiation in the
cavity at temperature T . (In contrast with Balfour Stewart's, Kirchhoff's definition of his absorption ratio
did not refer in particular to a lamp-black surface as the source of the incident radiation.) Thus the ratio
E(T, i)
a(T, i)  of emitting power to absorption ratio is a dimensioned quantity, with the dimensions of emitting
power, because a(T, i) is dimensionless. Also here the wavelength-specific emitting power of the body at
temperature T is denoted by E(λ, T, i) and the wavelength-specific absorption ratio by a(λ, T, i) .
Again, the ratio  E(λ, T, i)

a(λ, T, i)  of emitting power to absorption ratio is a dimensioned quantity, with the
dimensions of emitting power.

In a second report made in 1859, Kirchhoff announced a new general principle or law for which he
offered a theoretical and mathematical proof, though he did not offer quantitative measurements of
radiation powers.[50] His theoretical proof was and still is considered by some writers to be invalid.[48][51]

His principle, however, has endured: it was that for heat rays of the same wavelength, in equilibrium at a
given temperature, the wavelength-specific ratio of emitting power to absorption ratio has one and the
same common value for all bodies that emit and absorb at that wavelength. In symbols, the law stated that
the wavelength-specific ratio  E(λ, T, i)

a(λ, T, i)  has one and the same value for all bodies, that is for all values of
index i. In this report there was no mention of black bodies.



In 1860, still not knowing of Stewart's measurements for selected qualities of radiation, Kirchhoff pointed
out that it was long established experimentally that for total heat radiation, of unselected quality, emitted
and absorbed by a body in equilibrium, the dimensioned total radiation ratio  E(T, i)

a(T, i)  , has one and the
same value common to all bodies, that is, for every value of the material index i.[52] Again without
measurements of radiative powers or other new experimental data, Kirchhoff then offered a fresh
theoretical proof of his new principle of the universality of the value of the wavelength-specific ratio
E(λ, T, i)
a(λ, T, i)  at thermal equilibrium. His fresh theoretical proof was and still is considered by some writers to
be invalid.[48][51]

But more importantly, it relied on a new theoretical postulate of "perfectly black bodies", which is the
reason why one speaks of Kirchhoff's law. Such black bodies showed complete absorption in their
infinitely thin most superficial surface. They correspond to Balfour Stewart's reference bodies, with
internal radiation, coated with lamp-black. They were not the more realistic perfectly black bodies later
considered by Planck. Planck's black bodies radiated and absorbed only by the material in their interiors;
their interfaces with contiguous media were only mathematical surfaces, capable neither of absorption nor
emission, but only of reflecting and transmitting with refraction.[53]

Kirchhoff's proof considered an arbitrary non-ideal body labeled i as well as various perfect black bodies
labeled BB. It required that the bodies be kept in a cavity in thermal equilibrium at temperature T . His
proof intended to show that the ratio  E(λ, T, i)

a(λ, T, i)  was independent of the nature i of the non-ideal body,
however partly transparent or partly reflective it was.

His proof first argued that for wavelength λ and at temperature T, at thermal equilibrium, all perfectly
black bodies of the same size and shape have the one and the same common value of emissive power
E(λ, T, BB), with the dimensions of power. His proof noted that the dimensionless wavelength-specific
absorption ratio a(λ, T, BB) of a perfectly black body is by definition exactly 1. Then for a perfectly
black body, the wavelength-specific ratio of emissive power to absorption ratio  E(λ, T, BB)

a(λ, T, BB)  is again just
E(λ, T, BB), with the dimensions of power. Kirchhoff considered, successively, thermal equilibrium
with the arbitrary non-ideal body, and with a perfectly black body of the same size and shape, in place in
his cavity in equilibrium at temperature T . He argued that the flows of heat radiation must be the same in
each case. Thus he argued that at thermal equilibrium the ratio  E(λ, T, i)

a(λ, T, i)  was equal to E(λ, T, BB),
which may now be denoted Bλ (λ, T), a continuous function, dependent only on λ at fixed temperature
T, and an increasing function of T at fixed wavelength λ, at low temperatures vanishing for visible but
not for longer wavelengths, with positive values for visible wavelengths at higher temperatures, which
does not depend on the nature i of the arbitrary non-ideal body. (Geometrical factors, taken into detailed
account by Kirchhoff, have been ignored in the foregoing.)

Thus Kirchhoff's law of thermal radiation can be stated: For any material at all, radiating and
absorbing in thermodynamic equilibrium at any given temperature T, for every wavelength λ, the ratio of
emissive power to absorptive ratio has one universal value, which is characteristic of a perfect black
body, and is an emissive power which we here represent by Bλ (λ, T). (For our notation Bλ (λ, T),
Kirchhoff's original notation was simply e.)[7][52][54][55][56][57]



Kirchhoff announced that the determination of the function Bλ (λ, T) was a problem of the highest
importance, though he recognized that there would be experimental difficulties to be overcome. He
supposed that like other functions that do not depend on the properties of individual bodies, it would be a
simple function. That function Bλ (λ, T) has occasionally been called 'Kirchhoff's (emission, universal)
function',[58][59][60][61] though its precise mathematical form would not be known for another forty years,
till it was discovered by Planck in 1900. The theoretical proof for Kirchhoff's universality principle was
worked on and debated by various physicists over the same time, and later.[51] Kirchhoff stated later in
1860 that his theoretical proof was better than Balfour Stewart's, and in some respects it was so.[48]

Kirchhoff's 1860 paper did not mention the second law of thermodynamics, and of course did not
mention the concept of entropy which had not at that time been established. In a more considered account
in a book in 1862, Kirchhoff mentioned the connection of his law with "Carnot's principle", which is a
form of the second law.[62]

According to Helge Kragh, "Quantum theory owes its origin to the study of thermal radiation, in
particular to the "blackbody" radiation that Robert Kirchhoff had first defined in 1859–1860."[63]

Empirical and theoretical ingredients for the scientific induction of Planck's
law
In 1860, Kirchhoff predicted experimental difficulties for the empirical determination of the function that
described the dependence of the black-body spectrum as a function only of temperature and wavelength.
And so it turned out. It took some forty years of development of improved methods of measurement of
electromagnetic radiation to get a reliable result.[64]

In 1865, John Tyndall described radiation from electrically heated filaments and from carbon arcs as
visible and invisible.[65] Tyndall spectrally decomposed the radiation by use of a rock salt prism, which
passed heat as well as visible rays, and measured the radiation intensity by means of a thermopile.[66][67]

In 1880, André-Prosper-Paul Crova published a diagram of the three-dimensional appearance of the graph
of the strength of thermal radiation as a function of wavelength and temperature.[68] He determined the
spectral variable by use of prisms. He analyzed the surface through what he called "isothermal" curves,
sections for a single temperature, with a spectral variable on the abscissa and a power variable on the
ordinate. He put smooth curves through his experimental data points. They had one peak at a spectral
value characteristic for the temperature, and fell either side of it towards the horizontal axis.[69][70] Such
spectral sections are widely shown even today.

In a series of papers from 1881 to 1886, Langley reported measurements of the spectrum of heat
radiation, using diffraction gratings and prisms, and the most sensitive detectors that he could make. He
reported that there was a peak intensity that increased with temperature, that the shape of the spectrum
was not symmetrical about the peak, that there was a strong fall-off of intensity when the wavelength was
shorter than an approximate cut-off value for each temperature, that the approximate cut-off wavelength
decreased with increasing temperature, and that the wavelength of the peak intensity decreased with
temperature, so that the intensity increased strongly with temperature for short wavelengths that were
longer than the approximate cut-off for the temperature.[71]



Having read Langley, in 1888, Russian physicist V.A. Michelson published a consideration of the idea
that the unknown Kirchhoff radiation function could be explained physically and stated mathematically in
terms of "complete irregularity of the vibrations of ... atoms".[72][73] At this time, Planck was not studying
radiation closely, and believed in neither atoms nor statistical physics.[74] Michelson produced a formula
for the spectrum for temperature:

where Iλ denotes specific radiative intensity at wavelength λ and temperature θ, and where B1 and c are
empirical constants.

In 1898, Otto Lummer and Ferdinand Kurlbaum published an account of their cavity radiation source.[75]

Their design has been used largely unchanged for radiation measurements to the present day. It was a
platinum box, divided by diaphragms, with its interior blackened with iron oxide. It was an important
ingredient for the progressively improved measurements that led to the discovery of Planck's law.[76] A
version described in 1901 had its interior blackened with a mixture of chromium, nickel, and cobalt
oxides.[77]

The importance of the Lummer and Kurlbaum cavity radiation source was that it was an experimentally
accessible source of black-body radiation, as distinct from radiation from a simply exposed incandescent
solid body, which had been the nearest available experimental approximation to black-body radiation
over a suitable range of temperatures. The simply exposed incandescent solid bodies, that had been used
before, emitted radiation with departures from the black-body spectrum that made it impossible to find
the true black-body spectrum from experiments.[78][79]

Planck's views before the empirical facts led him to find his eventual law
Planck first turned his attention to the problem of black-body radiation in 1897.[80] Theoretical and
empirical progress enabled Lummer and Pringsheim to write in 1899 that available experimental
evidence was approximately consistent with the specific intensity law Cλ−5 −c

e ⁄λT where C and c denote
empirically measurable constants, and where λ and T denote wavelength and temperature
respectively.[81][82] For theoretical reasons, Planck at that time accepted this formulation, which has an
effective cut-off of short wavelengths.[83][84][85]

Gustav Kirchhoff was Max Planck's teacher and surmised that there was a universal law for blackbody
radiation and this was called "Kirchhoff's challenge".[86] Planck, a theorist, believed that Wilhelm Wien
had discovered this law and Planck expanded on Wien's work presenting it in 1899 to the meeting of the
German Physical Society. Experimentalists Otto Lummer, Ferdinand Kurlbaum, Ernst Pringsheim Sr.,
and Heinrich Rubens did experiments that appeared to support Wien's law especially at higher frequency
short wavelengths which Planck so wholly endorsed at the German Physical Society that it began to be
called the Wien-Planck Law.[87] However, by September 1900, the experimentalists had proven beyond a
doubt that the Wien-Planck law failed at the longer wavelengths. They would present their data on
October 19. Planck was informed by his friend Rubens and quickly created a formula within a few
days.[88] In June of that same year, Lord Rayleigh had created a formula that would work for short lower
frequency wavelengths based on the widely accepted theory of equipartition.[89] So Planck submitted a
formula combining both Rayleigh's Law (or a similar equipartition theory) and Wien's law which would
be weighted to one or the other law depending on wavelength to match the experimental data. However,



although this equation worked, Planck himself said unless he could explain the formula derived from a
"lucky intuition" into one of "true meaning" in physics, it did not have true significance.[90] Planck
explained that thereafter followed the hardest work of his life. Planck did not believe in atoms, nor did he
think the second law of thermodynamics should be statistical because probability does not provide an
absolute answer, and Boltzmann's entropy law rested on the hypothesis of atoms and was statistical. But
Planck was unable to find a way to reconcile his Blackbody equation with continuous laws such as
Maxwell's wave equations. So in what Planck called "an act of desperation",[91] he turned to Boltzmann's
atomic law of entropy as it was the only one that made his equation work. Therefore, he used the
Boltzmann constant k and his new constant h to explain the blackbody radiation law which became
widely known through his published paper.[92][93]

Finding the empirical law
Max Planck produced his law on 19 October 1900[94][95] as an improvement upon the Wien
approximation, published in 1896 by Wilhelm Wien, which fit the experimental data at short wavelengths
(high frequencies) but deviated from it at long wavelengths (low frequencies).[41] In June 1900, based on
heuristic theoretical considerations, Rayleigh had suggested a formula[96] that he proposed might be
checked experimentally. The suggestion was that the Stewart–Kirchhoff universal function might be of

c
the form c −4

1Tλ exp(– 2
λT  ) . This was not the celebrated Rayleigh–Jeans formula 8πkBTλ−4, which did

not emerge until 1905,[38] though it did reduce to the latter for long wavelengths, which are the relevant
ones here. According to Klein,[80] one may speculate that it is likely that Planck had seen this suggestion
though he did not mention it in his papers of 1900 and 1901. Planck would have been aware of various
other proposed formulas which had been offered.[64][97] On 7 October 1900, Rubens told Planck that in
the complementary domain (long wavelength, low frequency), and only there, Rayleigh's 1900 formula
fitted the observed data well.[97]

For long wavelengths, Rayleigh's 1900 heuristic formula approximately meant that energy was
dS

proportional to temperature, Uλ = const. T.[80][97][98] It is known that  dU  =  1 d this leads to
λ T  an

dS const. d2S const.
dU  =  

λ U  and thence to  dU 2  = − for short wavelengths, the Wien
λ λ U 2  for long wavelengths. But 

λ
d2S

formula leads to  1T  = − const. ln Uλ + const. and thence to  dU 2  = −  const.
elengths.

λ U  for short wav
λ

Planck perhaps patched together these two heuristic formulas, for long and for short wavelengths,[97][99]

to produce a formula[94]

This led Planck to the formula

where Planck used the symbols C and c to denote empirical fitting constants.



Planck sent this result to Rubens, who compared it with his and Kurlbaum's observational data and found
that it fitted for all wavelengths remarkably well. On 19 October 1900, Rubens and Kurlbaum briefly
reported the fit to the data,[100] and Planck added a short presentation to give a theoretical sketch to
account for his formula.[94] Within a week, Rubens and Kurlbaum gave a fuller report of their
measurements confirming Planck's law. Their technique for spectral resolution of the longer wavelength
radiation was called the residual ray method. The rays were repeatedly reflected from polished crystal
surfaces, and the rays that made it all the way through the process were 'residual', and were of
wavelengths preferentially reflected by crystals of suitably specific materials.[101][102][103]

Trying to find a physical explanation of the law
Once Planck had discovered the empirically fitting function, he constructed a physical derivation of this
law. His thinking revolved around entropy rather than being directly about temperature. Planck
considered a cavity with perfectly reflective walls; inside the cavity, there are finitely many distinct but
identically constituted resonant oscillatory bodies of definite magnitude, with several such oscillators at
each of finitely many characteristic frequencies. These hypothetical oscillators were for Planck purely
imaginary theoretical investigative probes, and he said of them that such oscillators do not need to "really
exist somewhere in nature, provided their existence and their properties are consistent with the laws of
thermodynamics and electrodynamics.".[104] Planck did not attribute any definite physical significance to
his hypothesis of resonant oscillators but rather proposed it as a mathematical device that enabled him to
derive a single expression for the black body spectrum that matched the empirical data at all
wavelengths.[105] He tentatively mentioned the possible connection of such oscillators with atoms. In a
sense, the oscillators corresponded to Planck's speck of carbon; the size of the speck could be small
regardless of the size of the cavity, provided the speck effectively transduced energy between radiative
wavelength modes.[97]

Partly following a heuristic method of calculation pioneered by Boltzmann for gas molecules, Planck
considered the possible ways of distributing electromagnetic energy over the different modes of his
hypothetical charged material oscillators. This acceptance of the probabilistic approach, following
Boltzmann, for Planck was a radical change from his former position, which till then had deliberately
opposed such thinking proposed by Boltzmann.[106] In Planck's words, "I considered the [quantum
hypothesis] a purely formal assumption, and I did not give it much thought except for this: that I had
obtained a positive result under any circumstances and at whatever cost."[107] Heuristically, Boltzmann
had distributed the energy in arbitrary merely mathematical quanta ϵ, which he had proceeded to make
tend to zero in magnitude, because the finite magnitude ϵ had served only to allow definite counting for
the sake of mathematical calculation of probabilities, and had no physical significance. Referring to a
new universal constant of nature, h,[108] Planck supposed that, in the several oscillators of each of the
finitely many characteristic frequencies, the total energy was distributed to each in an integer multiple of
a definite physical unit of energy, ϵ, characteristic of the respective characteristic
frequency.[95][109][110][111] His new universal constant of nature, h, is now known as the Planck constant.

Planck explained further[95] that the respective definite unit, ϵ, of energy should be proportional to the
respective characteristic oscillation frequency ν of the hypothetical oscillator, and in 1901 he expressed
this with the constant of proportionality h:[112][113]



Planck did not propose that light propagating in free space is quantized.[114][115][116] The idea of
quantization of the free electromagnetic field was developed later, and eventually incorporated into what
we now know as quantum field theory.[117]

In 1906, Planck acknowledged that his imaginary resonators, having linear dynamics, did not provide a
physical explanation for energy transduction between frequencies.[118][119] Present-day physics explains
the transduction between frequencies in the presence of atoms by their quantum excitability, following
Einstein. Planck believed that in a cavity with perfectly reflecting walls and with no matter present, the
electromagnetic field cannot exchange energy between frequency components.[120] This is because of the
linearity of Maxwell's equations.[121] Present-day quantum field theory predicts that, in the absence of
matter, the electromagnetic field obeys nonlinear equations and in that sense does self-interact.[122][123]

Such interaction in the absence of matter has not yet been directly measured because it would require
very high intensities and very sensitive and low-noise detectors, which are still in the process of being
constructed.[122][124] Planck believed that a field with no interactions neither obeys nor violates the
classical principle of equipartition of energy,[125][126] and instead remains exactly as it was when
introduced, rather than evolving into a black body field.[127] Thus, the linearity of his mechanical
assumptions precluded Planck from having a mechanical explanation of the maximization of the entropy
of the thermodynamic equilibrium thermal radiation field. This is why he had to resort to Boltzmann's
probabilistic arguments.[128][129]

Planck's law may be regarded as fulfilling the prediction of Gustav Kirchhoff that his law of thermal
radiation was of the highest importance. In his mature presentation of his own law, Planck offered a
thorough and detailed theoretical proof for Kirchhoff's law,[130] theoretical proof of which until then had
been sometimes debated, partly because it was said to rely on unphysical theoretical objects, such as
Kirchhoff's perfectly absorbing infinitely thin black surface.[131]

Subsequent events
It was not until five years after Planck made his heuristic assumption of abstract elements of energy or of
action that Albert Einstein conceived of really existing quanta of light in 1905[132] as a revolutionary
explanation of black-body radiation, of photoluminescence, of the photoelectric effect, and of the
ionization of gases by ultraviolet light. In 1905, "Einstein believed that Planck's theory could not be made
to agree with the idea of light quanta, a mistake he corrected in 1906."[133] Contrary to Planck's beliefs of
the time, Einstein proposed a model and formula whereby light was emitted, absorbed, and propagated in
free space in energy quanta localized in points of space.[132] As an introduction to his reasoning, Einstein
recapitulated Planck's model of hypothetical resonant material electric oscillators as sources and sinks of
radiation, but then he offered a new argument, disconnected from that model, but partly based on a
thermodynamic argument of Wien, in which Planck's formula ϵ = hν played no role.[134] Einstein gave
the energy content of such quanta in the form  Rβν

N  . Thus Einstein was contradicting the undulatory theory
of light held by Planck. In 1910, criticizing a manuscript sent to him by Planck, knowing that Planck was
a steady supporter of Einstein's theory of special relativity, Einstein wrote to Planck: "To me it seems
absurd to have energy continuously distributed in space without assuming an aether."[135]

According to Thomas Kuhn, it was not till 1908 that Planck more or less accepted part of Einstein's
arguments for physical as distinct from abstract mathematical discreteness in thermal radiation physics.
Still in 1908, considering Einstein's proposal of quantal propagation, Planck opined that such a



revolutionary step was perhaps unnecessary.[136] Until then, Planck had been consistent in thinking that
discreteness of action quanta was to be found neither in his resonant oscillators nor in the propagation of
thermal radiation. Kuhn wrote that, in Planck's earlier papers and in his 1906 monograph,[137] there is no
"mention of discontinuity, [nor] of talk of a restriction on oscillator energy, [nor of] any formula like
U = nhν." Kuhn pointed out that his study of Planck's papers of 1900 and 1901, and of his monograph of
1906,[137] had led him to "heretical" conclusions, contrary to the widespread assumptions of others who
saw Planck's writing only from the perspective of later, anachronistic, viewpoints.[138] Kuhn's
conclusions, finding a period till 1908, when Planck consistently held his 'first theory', have been
accepted by other historians.[139]

In the second edition of his monograph, in 1912, Planck sustained his dissent from Einstein's proposal of
light quanta. He proposed in some detail that absorption of light by his virtual material resonators might
be continuous, occurring at a constant rate in equilibrium, as distinct from quantal absorption. Only
emission was quantal.[121][140] This has at times been called Planck's "second theory".[141]

It was not till 1919 that Planck in the third edition of his monograph more or less accepted his 'third
theory', that both emission and absorption of light were quantal.[142]

The colourful term "ultraviolet catastrophe" was given by Paul Ehrenfest in 1911 to the paradoxical result
that the total energy in the cavity tends to infinity when the equipartition theorem of classical statistical
mechanics is (mistakenly) applied to black-body radiation.[143][144] But this had not been part of Planck's
thinking, because he had not tried to apply the doctrine of equipartition: when he made his discovery in
1900, he had not noticed any sort of "catastrophe".[83][84][85][80][145] It was first noted by Lord Rayleigh
in 1900,[96][146][147] and then in 1901[148] by Sir James Jeans; and later, in 1905, by Einstein when he
wanted to support the idea that light propagates as discrete packets, later called 'photons', and by
Rayleigh[39] and by Jeans.[38][149][150][151]

In 1913, Bohr gave another formula with a further different physical meaning to the quantity
hν.[34][35][36][152][153][154] In contrast to Planck's and Einstein's formulas, Bohr's formula referred
explicitly and categorically to energy levels of atoms. Bohr's formula was Wτ  − Wτ  = hν where W

2 1 τ2
and Wτ  denote the energy levels of quantum states of an atom, with quantum numbers τ2 and τ1. The

1
symbol ν denotes the frequency of a quantum of radiation that can be emitted or absorbed as the atom
passes between those two quantum states. In contrast to Planck's model, the frequency  has no
immediate relation to frequencies that might describe those quantum states themselves.

Later, in 1924, Satyendra Nath Bose developed the theory of the statistical mechanics of photons, which
allowed a theoretical derivation of Planck's law.[155] The actual word 'photon' was invented still later, by
G.N. Lewis in 1926,[156] who mistakenly believed that photons were conserved, contrary to Bose–
Einstein statistics; nevertheless the word 'photon' was adopted to express the Einstein postulate of the
packet nature of light propagation. In an electromagnetic field isolated in a vacuum in a vessel with
perfectly reflective walls, such as was considered by Planck, indeed the photons would be conserved
according to Einstein's 1905 model, but Lewis was referring to a field of photons considered as a system
closed with respect to ponderable matter but open to exchange of electromagnetic energy with a
surrounding system of ponderable matter, and he mistakenly imagined that still the photons were
conserved, being stored inside atoms.



Ultimately, Planck's law of black-body radiation contributed to Einstein's concept of quanta of light
carrying linear momentum,[34][132] which became the fundamental basis for the development of quantum
mechanics.

The above-mentioned linearity of Planck's mechanical assumptions, not allowing for energetic
interactions between frequency components, was superseded in 1925 by Heisenberg's original quantum
mechanics. In his paper submitted on 29 July 1925, Heisenberg's theory accounted for Bohr's above-
mentioned formula of 1913. It admitted non-linear oscillators as models of atomic quantum states,
allowing energetic interaction between their own multiple internal discrete Fourier frequency
components, on the occasions of emission or absorption of quanta of radiation. The frequency of a
quantum of radiation was that of a definite coupling between internal atomic meta-stable oscillatory
quantum states.[157][158] At that time, Heisenberg knew nothing of matrix algebra, but Max Born read the
manuscript of Heisenberg's paper and recognized the matrix character of Heisenberg's theory. Then Born
and Jordan published an explicitly matrix theory of quantum mechanics, based on, but in form distinctly
different from, Heisenberg's original quantum mechanics; it is the Born and Jordan matrix theory that is
today called matrix mechanics.[159][160][161] Heisenberg's explanation of the Planck oscillators, as non-
linear effects apparent as Fourier modes of transient processes of emission or absorption of radiation,
showed why Planck's oscillators, viewed as enduring physical objects such as might be envisaged by
classical physics, did not give an adequate explanation of the phenomena.

Nowadays, as a statement of the energy of a light quantum, often one finds the formula E = ħω, where
ħ =  h2π  , and ω = 2πν denotes angular frequency,[162][163][164][165][166] and less often the equivalent
formula E = hν.[165][166][167][168][169] This statement about a really existing and propagating light
quantum, based on Einstein's, has a physical meaning different from that of Planck's above statement
ϵ = hν about the abstract energy units to be distributed amongst his hypothetical resonant material
oscillators.

An article by Helge Kragh published in Physics World gives an account of this history.[111]

See also
Emissivity
Radiance
Sakuma–Hattori equation

References
1. Young, Hugh D.; Freedman, Roger A.; Ford, A. Lewis (2016). University Physics (14th ed.).

Perason. pp. 1256–1257. ISBN 9780321973610.
2. Planck 1914, p. 42
3. Gaofeng Shao, et al. 2019, p. 6 (https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02308467/document#pa

ge=7).
4. Zangwill, Andrew (2013). Modern electrodynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge university press.

p. 698. ISBN 978-0-521-89697-9.
5. Andrews, David G. (2010). An introduction to atmospheric physics (2nd éd ed.). Cambridge:

Cambridge university press. p. 54. ISBN 978-0-521-87220-1.



6. Planck 1914, pp. 6, 168
7. Chandrasekhar 1960, p. 8
8. Rybicki & Lightman 1979, p. 22
9. Stewart 1858

10. Hapke 1993, pp. 362–373
11. Planck 1914
12. Loudon 2000, pp. 3–45
13. Caniou 1999, p. 117
14. Kramm & Mölders 2009, p. 10
15. Sharkov 2003, p. 210
16. Marr, Jonathan M.; Wilkin, Francis P. (2012). "A Better Presentation of Planck's Radiation

Law" (https://scholarship.haverford.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1579&context=physics_f
acpubs). Am. J. Phys. 80 (5): 399. arXiv:1109.3822 (https://arxiv.org/abs/1109.3822).
Bibcode:2012AmJPh..80..399M (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012AmJPh..80..399M).
doi:10.1119/1.3696974 (https://doi.org/10.1119%2F1.3696974). S2CID 10556556 (https://a
pi.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:10556556).

17. Fischer 2011
18. Goody & Yung 1989, p. 16.
19. Mohr, Taylor & Newell 2012, p. 1591
20. Loudon 2000
21. Mandel & Wolf 1995
22. Wilson 1957, p. 182
23. Adkins 1983, pp. 147–148
24. Landsberg 1978, p. 208
25. Siegel & Howell 2002, p. 25
26. Planck 1914, pp. 9–11
27. Planck 1914, p. 35
28. Landsberg 1961, pp. 273–274
29. Born & Wolf 1999, pp. 194–199
30. Born & Wolf 1999, p. 195
31. Rybicki & Lightman 1979, p. 19
32. Chandrasekhar 1960, p. 7
33. Chandrasekhar 1960, p. 9
34. Einstein 1916
35. Bohr 1913
36. Jammer 1989, pp. 113, 115
37. Kittel & Kroemer 1980, p. 98
38. Jeans 1905a, p. 98
39. Rayleigh 1905
40. Rybicki & Lightman 1979, p. 23
41. Wien 1896, p. 667
42. Planck 1906, p. 158
43. Lowen & Blanch 1940
44. Integrated from Christian Gueymard (April 2004). "The sun's total and spectral irradiance for

solar energy applications and solar radiation models". Solar Energy. 76 (4): 423–453.
Bibcode:2004SoEn...76..423G (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004SoEn...76..423G).
doi:10.1016/j.solener.2003.08.039 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.solener.2003.08.039).



45. Zettili, Nouredine (2009). Quantum mechanics: concepts and applications (2nd ed.).
Chichester: Wiley. pp. 594–596. ISBN 978-0-470-02679-3.

46. Segre, Carlo. "The Einstein coefficients - Fundamentals of Quantum Theory II (PHYS 406)"
(http://phys.iit.edu/~segre/phys406/21S/modules_16.pdf) (PDF). p. 32.

47. Zwiebach, Barton. "Quantum Physics III Chapter 4: Time Dependent Perturbation Theory |
Quantum Physics III | Physics" (https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/8-06-quantum-physics-iii-spring-
2018/resources/mit8_06s18ch4/). MIT OpenCourseWare. pp. 108–110. Retrieved
3 November 2023.

48. Siegel 1976
49. Kirchhoff 1860a
50. Kirchhoff 1860b
51. Schirrmacher 2001
52. Kirchhoff 1860c
53. Planck 1914, p. 11
54. Milne 1930, p. 80
55. Rybicki & Lightman 1979, pp. 16–17
56. Mihalas & Weibel-Mihalas 1984, p. 328
57. Goody & Yung 1989, pp. 27–28
58. Paschen, F. (1896), personal letter cited by Hermann 1971, p. 6
59. Hermann 1971, p. 7
60. Kuhn 1978, pp. 8, 29
61. Mehra & Rechenberg 1982, pp. 26, 28, 31, 39
62. Kirchhoff 1862, p. 573
63. Kragh 1999, p. 58
64. Kangro 1976
65. Tyndall 1865a
66. Tyndall 1865b
67. Kangro 1976, pp. 8–10
68. Crova 1880
69. Crova 1880, p. 577, Plate I
70. Kangro 1976, pp. 10–15
71. Kangro 1976, pp. 15–26
72. Michelson 1888
73. Kangro 1976, pp. 30–36
74. Kangro 1976, pp. 122–123
75. Lummer & Kurlbaum 1898
76. Kangro 1976, p. 159
77. Lummer & Kurlbaum 1901
78. Kangro 1976, pp. 75–76
79. Paschen 1895, pp. 297–301
80. Klein 1962, p. 460.
81. Lummer & Pringsheim 1899, p. 225
82. Kangro 1976, p. 174
83. Planck 1900d
84. Rayleigh 1900, p. 539
85. Kangro 1976, pp. 181–183



86. Pasupathy, J. "The Quantum, Its Discovery and the Continuing Quest." Current Science, vol.
79, no. 11, Temporary Publisher, 2000, pp. 1609–1614,
http://www.jstor.org/stable/24104871.

87. Kumar, Manjit, Quantum: Einstein, Bohr, and the great debate about the nature of reality, 1st
American ed., 2008.

88. Stone, A. Douglas, Einstein and the quantum : the quest of the valiant Swabian, 2013,
Princeton University Press.

89. "Remarks upon the Law of Complete Radiation", in The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin
Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, Vol. XLIX, January–June 1900, pp. 539–
541, Rayleigh, Lord (John William Strutt)

90. Planck, Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers (New York: Philosophical Library, 1949),
41.

91. Hermann, "Genesis of Quantum Theory", American Journal of Physics 40, 1355 (1972) p.
23.

92. Max Planck, "On the Theory of the Energy Distribution Law of the Normal Spectrum",
Verhandl, Dtsch, phys Ges, 2, (1900)

93. Physics World, "Max Planck: the reluctant revolutionary", 01 Dec 2000. Quote: "According to
Boltzmann's molecular-mechanical interpretation, the entropy of a system is the collective
result of molecular motions. The second law is valid only in a statistical sense. Boltzmann's
theory, which presupposed the existence of atoms and molecules, was challenged by
Wilhelm Ostwald and other "energeticists", who wanted to free physics from the notion of
atoms and base it on energy and related quantities. What was Planck's position in this
debate? One might expect that he sided with the winners, or those who soon turned out to
be the winners – namely Boltzmann and the "atomists". But this was not the case. Planck's
belief in the absolute validity of the second law made him not only reject Boltzmann's
statistical version of thermodynamics but also doubt the atomic hypothesis on which it
rested." https://physicsworld.com/a/max-planck-the-reluctant-revolutionary/

94. Planck 1900a
95. Planck 1900b
96. Rayleigh 1900
97. Dougal 1976
98. Planck 1943, p. 156
99. Hettner 1922

100. Rubens & Kurlbaum 1900a
101. Rubens & Kurlbaum 1900b
102. Kangro 1976, p. 165
103. Mehra & Rechenberg 1982, p. 41
104. Planck 1914, p. 135
105. Kuhn 1978, pp. 117–118
106. Hermann 1971, p. 16
107. Planck to Robert William Woods, 7 October 1931, in Armin Hermann, The Genesis of

Quantum Theory (1899–1913) (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971), 24.
108. Planck 1900c
109. Kangro 1976, p. 214
110. Kuhn 1978, p. 106
111. Kragh 2000
112. Planck 1901
113. Planck 1915, p. 89
114. Ehrenfest & Kamerlingh Onnes 1914, p. 873



115. ter Haar 1967, p. 14
116. Stehle 1994, p. 128
117. Scully & Zubairy 1997, p. 21.
118. Planck 1906, p. 220
119. Kuhn 1978, p. 162
120. Planck 1914, pp. 44–45, 113–114
121. Stehle 1994, p. 150
122. Jauch & Rohrlich 1980, Chapter 13
123. Karplus & Neuman 1951
124. Tommasini et al. 2008
125. Jeffreys 1973, p. 223
126. Planck 1906, p. 178
127. Planck 1914, p. 26
128. Boltzmann 1878
129. Kuhn 1978, pp. 38–39
130. Planck 1914, pp. 1–45
131. Cotton 1899
132. Einstein 1905
133. Kragh 1999, p. 67
134. Stehle 1994, pp. 132–137
135. Einstein 1993, p. 143, letter of 1910.
136. Planck 1915, p. 95
137. Planck 1906
138. Kuhn 1978, pp. 196–202
139. Kragh 1999, pp. 63–66
140. Planck 1914, p. 161
141. Kuhn 1978, pp. 235–253
142. Kuhn 1978, pp. 253–254
143. Ehrenfest 1911
144. Kuhn 1978, p. 152
145. Kuhn 1978, pp. 151–152
146. Kangro 1976, p. 190
147. Kuhn 1978, pp. 144–145
148. Jeans 1901, footnote on p. 398
149. Jeans 1905b
150. Jeans 1905c
151. Jeans 1905d
152. Sommerfeld 1923, p. 43
153. Heisenberg 1925, p. 108
154. Brillouin 1970, p. 31
155. Bose 1924
156. Lewis 1926
157. Heisenberg 1925
158. Razavy 2011, pp. 39–41
159. Born & Jordan 1925



160. Stehle 1994, p. 286
161. Razavy 2011, pp. 42–43
162. Messiah 1958, p. 14
163. Pauli 1973, p. 1
164. Feynman, Leighton & Sands 1963, p. 38-1
165. Schwinger 2001, p. 203
166. Bohren & Clothiaux 2006, p. 2
167. Schiff 1949, p. 2
168. Mihalas & Weibel-Mihalas 1984, p. 143
169. Rybicki & Lightman 1979, p. 20

Bibliography
Adkins, C. J. (1983). Equilibrium Thermodynamics (3rd ed.). Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-25445-8.
Andrews, David (2000). An Introduction to Atmospheric Physics. Cambridge University
Press. ISBN 0511800770.
Bohr, N. (1913). "On the constitution of atoms and molecules" (http://www.ffn.ub.es/luisnavar
ro/nuevo_maletin/Bohr_1913.pdf) (PDF). Philosophical Magazine. 26 (153): 1–25.
Bibcode:1913PMag...26..476B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1913PMag...26..476B).
doi:10.1080/14786441308634993 (https://doi.org/10.1080%2F14786441308634993).
Bohren, C. F.; Clothiaux, E. E. (2006). Fundamentals of Atmospheric Radiation. Wiley-VCH.
ISBN 978-3-527-40503-9.
Boltzmann, L. (1878). "Über die Beziehung zwischen dem zweiten Hauptsatze der
mechanischen Wärmetheorie und der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung, respective den Sätzen
über das Wärmegleichgewicht". Sitzungsberichte Mathematisch-Naturwissenschaftlichen
Classe der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien. 76 (2): 373–435.
Born, M.; Wolf, E. (1999). Principles of Optics (7th ed.). Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-64222-4.
Born, M.; Jordan, P. (1925). "Zur Quantenmechanik". Zeitschrift für Physik. 34 (1): 858–888.
Bibcode:1925ZPhy...34..858B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1925ZPhy...34..858B).
doi:10.1007/BF01328531 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2FBF01328531). S2CID 186114542 (htt
ps://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:186114542). Translated in part as "On quantum
mechanics" in van der Waerden, B. L. (1967). Sources of Quantum Mechanics. North-
Holland Publishing. pp. 277–306.
Bose, Satyendra Nath (1924). "Plancks Gesetz und Lichtquantenhypothese". Zeitschrift für
Physik (in German). 26 (1): 178–181. Bibcode:1924ZPhy...26..178B (https://ui.adsabs.harva
rd.edu/abs/1924ZPhy...26..178B). doi:10.1007/BF01327326 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2FBF
01327326). S2CID 186235974 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:186235974).
Brehm, J. J.; Mullin, W. J. (1989). Introduction to the Structure of Matter (https://archive.org/
details/introductiontost00breh). Wiley. ISBN 978-0-471-60531-7.
Brillouin, L. (1970). Relativity Reexamined (https://archive.org/details/relativityreexam0000br
il). Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-134945-5.
Caniou, J. (1999). Passive Infrared Detection: Theory and Applications (https://books.googl
e.com/books?id=X-aFGcf6pOEC&pg=116). Springer. ISBN 978-0-7923-8532-5.
Chandrasekhar, S. (1960) [1950]. Radiative Transfer (https://archive.org/details/radiativetran
sfe0000chan) (Revised reprint ed.). Dover Publications. ISBN 978-0-486-60590-6.
Cotton, A. (1899). "The present status of Kirchhoff's law". The Astrophysical Journal. 9: 237–
268. Bibcode:1899ApJ.....9..237C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1899ApJ.....9..237C).
doi:10.1086/140585 (https://doi.org/10.1086%2F140585).



Crova, A. P. P. (1880). "Étude des radiations émises par les corps incandescents. Mesure
optique des hautes températures" (http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k34859d/f470.image.r
=Annales%20de%20Chimie%20et%20de%20Physique.langEN). Annales de chimie et de
physique. Série 5. 19: 472–550.
Dougal, R. C. (1976). "The presentation of the Planck radiation formula (tutorial)". Physics
Education. 11 (6): 438–443. Bibcode:1976PhyEd..11..438D (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/a
bs/1976PhyEd..11..438D). doi:10.1088/0031-9120/11/6/008 (https://doi.org/10.1088%2F003
1-9120%2F11%2F6%2F008). S2CID 250881729 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
250881729).
Ehrenfest, P. (1911). "Welche Züge der Lichtquantenhypothese spielen in der Theorie der
Wärmestrahlung eine wesentliche Rolle?" (https://zenodo.org/record/1424215). Annalen der
Physik. 36 (11): 91–118. Bibcode:1911AnP...341...91E (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1
911AnP...341...91E). doi:10.1002/andp.19113411106 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fandp.191
13411106).
Ehrenfest, P.; Kamerlingh Onnes, H. (1914). "Simplified deduction of the formula from the
theory of combinations which Planck uses as the basis of his radiation theory". Proceedings
of the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences in Amsterdam. 17 (2): 870–873.
Bibcode:1914KNAB...17..870E (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1914KNAB...17..870E).
Einstein, A. (1905). "Über einen die Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes betreffenden
heuristischen Gesichtspunkt" (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fandp.19053220607). Annalen der
Physik. 17 (6): 132–148. Bibcode:1905AnP...322..132E (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1
905AnP...322..132E). doi:10.1002/andp.19053220607 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fandp.190
53220607). Translated in Arons, A. B.; Peppard, M. B. (1965). "Einstein's proposal of the
photon concept: A translation of the Annalen der Physik paper of 1905" (https://web.archive.
org/web/20160304031335/http://astro1.panet.utoledo.edu/~ljc/PE_eng.pdf) (PDF). American
Journal of Physics. 33 (5): 367. Bibcode:1965AmJPh..33..367A (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.e
du/abs/1965AmJPh..33..367A). doi:10.1119/1.1971542 (https://doi.org/10.1119%2F1.19715
42). Archived from the original (http://astro1.panet.utoledo.edu/~ljc/PE_eng.pdf) (PDF) on 4
March 2016. Retrieved 19 April 2011.
Einstein, A. (1916). "Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung". Mitteilungen der Physikalischen
Gesellschaft Zürich. 18: 47–62. and a nearly identical version Einstein, A. (1917). "Zur
Quantentheorie der Strahlung". Physikalische Zeitschrift. 18: 121–128.
Bibcode:1917PhyZ...18..121E (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1917PhyZ...18..121E).
Translated in ter Haar, D. (1967). "On the Quantum Theory of Radiation" (https://archive.org/
details/oldquantumtheory0000haar/page/167). The Old Quantum Theory. Pergamon Press.
pp. 167–183. LCCN 66029628 (https://lccn.loc.gov/66029628). See also [1] (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20110723012756/http://astro1.panet.utoledo.edu/~ljc/einstein_ab.pdf).
Einstein, A. (1993). The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Vol. 3. English translation by
Beck, A. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-10250-4.
Feynman, R. P.; Leighton, R. B.; Sands, M. (1963). The Feynman Lectures on Physics,
Volume 1. Addison-Wesley. ISBN 978-0-201-02010-6.
Fischer, T. (1 November 2011). "Topics: Derivation of Planck's Law" (https://nanohub.org/wik
i/DerivationofPlancksLaw). ThermalHUB. Retrieved 19 June 2015.
Gaofeng Shao; Yucao Lu; Dorian A.H. Hanaor; Sheng Cui; Jian Jiao; Xiaodong Shen
(2019). "Improved oxidation resistance of high emissivity coatings on fibrous ceramic for
reusable space systems" (https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02308467/document).
Corrosion Science. 146. Elsevier: 233–246. arXiv:1902.03943 (https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.03
943). doi:10.1016/j.corsci.2018.11.006 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.corsci.2018.11.006).
S2CID 118927116 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:118927116). HAL Id: hal-
02308467 – via HAL archives ouverts.
Goody, R. M.; Yung, Y. L. (1989). Atmospheric Radiation: Theoretical Basis (2nd ed.).
Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-510291-8.



Guggenheim, E. A. (1967). Thermodynamics. An Advanced Treatment for Chemists and
Physicists (5th revised ed.). North-Holland Publishing Company.
Haken, H. (1981). Light (Reprint ed.). Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing. ISBN 978-0-
444-86020-0.
Hapke, B. (1993). Theory of Reflectance and Emittance Spectroscopy. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge UK. ISBN 978-0-521-30789-5.
Heisenberg, W. (1925). "Über quantentheoretische Umdeutung kinematischer und
mechanischer Beziehungen". Zeitschrift für Physik. 33 (1): 879–893.
Bibcode:1925ZPhy...33..879H (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1925ZPhy...33..879H).
doi:10.1007/BF01328377 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2FBF01328377). S2CID 186238950 (htt
ps://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:186238950). Translated as "Quantum-theoretical Re-
interpretation of kinematic and mechanical relations" in van der Waerden, B. L. (1967).
Sources of Quantum Mechanics. North-Holland Publishing. pp. 261–276.
Heisenberg, W. (1930). The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory (https://archive.org/
details/in.ernet.dli.2015.166273). Eckart, C.; Hoyt, F. C. (transl.). University of Chicago
Press.
Hermann, A. (1971). The Genesis of Quantum Theory (https://archive.org/details/genesisofq
uantum00herm). Nash, C.W. (transl.). MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-08047-7. a translation of
Frühgeschichte der Quantentheorie (1899–1913), Physik Verlag, Mosbach/Baden, 1969.
Hettner, G. (1922). "Die Bedeutung von Rubens Arbeiten für die Plancksche
Strahlungsformel" (https://zenodo.org/record/2441107). Naturwissenschaften. 10 (48):
1033–1038. Bibcode:1922NW.....10.1033H (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1922NW.....1
0.1033H). doi:10.1007/BF01565205 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2FBF01565205).
S2CID 46268714 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:46268714).
Jammer, M. (1989). The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics (second ed.).
Tomash Publishers/American Institute of Physics. ISBN 978-0-88318-617-6.
Jauch, J. M.; Rohrlich, F. (1980) [1955]. The Theory of Photons and Electrons. The
Relativistic Quantum Field Theory of Charged Particles with Spin One-half (https://archive.or
g/details/theoryofphotonse0000jauc) (second printing of second ed.). Springer. ISBN 978-0-
387-07295-1.
Jeans, J. H. (1901). "The Distribution of Molecular Energy". Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society A. 196 (274–286): 397–430. Bibcode:1901RSPTA.196..397J (https://ui.ad
sabs.harvard.edu/abs/1901RSPTA.196..397J). doi:10.1098/rsta.1901.0008 (https://doi.org/1
0.1098%2Frsta.1901.0008). JSTOR 90811 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/90811).
Jeans, J. H. (1905a). "XI. On the partition of energy between matter and æther" (https://zen
odo.org/record/1430776). Philosophical Magazine. 10 (55): 91–98.
doi:10.1080/14786440509463348 (https://doi.org/10.1080%2F14786440509463348).
Jeans, J. H. (1905b). "On the Application of Statistical Mechanics to the General Dynamics
of Matter and Ether" (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspa.1905.0029). Proceedings of the Royal
Society A. 76 (510): 296–311. Bibcode:1905RSPSA..76..296J (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.ed
u/abs/1905RSPSA..76..296J). doi:10.1098/rspa.1905.0029 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frsp
a.1905.0029). JSTOR 92714 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/92714).
Jeans, J. H. (1905c). "A Comparison between Two Theories of Radiation" (https://zenodo.or
g/record/2061049). Nature. 72 (1865): 293–294. Bibcode:1905Natur..72..293J (https://ui.ads
abs.harvard.edu/abs/1905Natur..72..293J). doi:10.1038/072293d0 (https://doi.org/10.1038%
2F072293d0). S2CID 3955227 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:3955227).
Jeans, J. H. (1905d). "On the Laws of Radiation" (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspa.1905.006
0). Proceedings of the Royal Society A. 76 (513): 545–552. Bibcode:1905RSPSA..76..545J
(https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1905RSPSA..76..545J). doi:10.1098/rspa.1905.0060 (htt
ps://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspa.1905.0060). JSTOR 92704 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/9270
4).



Jeffreys, H. (1973). Scientific Inference (https://archive.org/details/scientificinfere0000jeff)
(3rd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-08446-8.
Kangro, H. (1976). Early History of Planck's Radiation Law. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-
85066-063-0.
Karplus, R.; Neuman, M. (1951). "The Scattering of Light by Light". Physical Review. 83 (4):
776–784. Bibcode:1951PhRv...83..776K (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1951PhRv...83..
776K). doi:10.1103/PhysRev.83.776 (https://doi.org/10.1103%2FPhysRev.83.776).
Kirchhoff, G. R. (1860a). "Über die Fraunhofer'schen Linien". Monatsberichte der Königlich
Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin: 662–665.
Kirchhoff, G. R. (1860b). "Über den Zusammenhang zwischen Emission und Absorption von
Licht und Wärme". Monatsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften zu Berlin: 783–787.
Kirchhoff, G. R. (1860c). "Über das Verhältniss zwischen dem Emissionsvermögen und dem
Absorptionsvermögen der Körper für Wärme and Licht" (https://zenodo.org/record/142366
8). Annalen der Physik und Chemie. 109 (2): 275–301. Bibcode:1860AnP...185..275K (http
s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1860AnP...185..275K). doi:10.1002/andp.18601850205 (http
s://doi.org/10.1002%2Fandp.18601850205). Translated by Guthrie, F. as Kirchhoff, G. R.
(1860). "On the relation between the radiating and absorbing powers of different bodies for
light and heat". Philosophical Magazine. Series 4. 20: 1–21.
Kirchhoff, G. R. (1862), "Über das Verhältniss zwischen dem Emissionsvermögen und dem
Absorptionsvermögen der Körper für Wärme und Licht", Gessamelte Abhandlungen, Johann
Ambrosius Barth, pp. 571–598
Kittel, C.; Kroemer, H. (1980). Thermal Physics (2nd ed.). W. H. Freeman. ISBN 978-0-
7167-1088-2.
Klein, M. J. (1962). "Max Planck and the beginnings of the quantum theory". Archive for
History of Exact Sciences. 1 (5): 459–479. doi:10.1007/BF00327765 (https://doi.org/10.100
7%2FBF00327765). S2CID 121189755 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:12118975
5).
Kragh, H. (1999). Quantum Generations. A History of Physics in the Twentieth Century (http
s://archive.org/details/quantumgeneratio0000krag). Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-
691-01206-3.
Kragh, H. (December 2000). "Max Planck: The reluctant revolutionary" (https://physicsworld.
com/a/max-planck-the-reluctant-revolutionary/). Physics World. 13 (12): 31–36.
doi:10.1088/2058-7058/13/12/34 (https://doi.org/10.1088%2F2058-7058%2F13%2F12%2F3
4).
Kramm, Gerhard; Mölders, N. (2009). "Planck's Blackbody Radiation Law: Presentation in
Different Domains and Determination of the Related Dimensional Constant". Journal of the
Calcutta Mathematical Society. 5 (1–2): 27–61. arXiv:0901.1863 (https://arxiv.org/abs/0901.
1863). Bibcode:2009arXiv0901.1863K (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009arXiv0901.18
63K).
Kuhn, T. S. (1978). Black–Body Theory and the Quantum Discontinuity. Oxford University
Press. ISBN 978-0-19-502383-1.
Landsberg, P. T. (1961). Thermodynamics with Quantum Statistical Illustrations. Interscience
Publishers.
Landsberg, P. T. (1978). Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics. Oxford University
Press. ISBN 978-0-19-851142-7.
Lewis, G. N. (1926). "The Conservation of Photons". Nature. 118 (2981): 874–875.
Bibcode:1926Natur.118..874L (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1926Natur.118..874L).
doi:10.1038/118874a0 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F118874a0). S2CID 4110026 (https://api.s
emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4110026).
Loudon, R. (2000). The Quantum Theory of Light (https://books.google.com/books?id=AEkf
ajgqldoC&pg=PA3) (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-850177-0.



Lowen, A. N.; Blanch, G. (1940). "Tables of Planck's radiation and photon functions". Journal
of the Optical Society of America. 30 (2): 70. Bibcode:1940JOSA...30...70L (https://ui.adsab
s.harvard.edu/abs/1940JOSA...30...70L). doi:10.1364/JOSA.30.000070 (https://doi.org/10.1
364%2FJOSA.30.000070).
Lummer, O.; Kurlbaum, F. (1898). "Der electrisch geglühte "absolut schwarze" Körper und
seine Temperaturmessung". Verhandlungen der Deutschen Physikalischen Gesellschaft. 17:
106–111.
Lummer, O.; Pringsheim, E. (1899). "1. Die Vertheilung der Energie in Spectrum des
schwarzen Körpers und des blanken Platins; 2. Temperaturbestimmung fester glühender
Körper". Verhandlungen der Deutschen Physikalischen Gesellschaft. 1: 215–235.
Lummer, O.; Kurlbaum, F. (1901). "Der elektrisch geglühte "schwarze" Körper" (https://zeno
do.org/record/1424003). Annalen der Physik. 310 (8): 829–836.
Bibcode:1901AnP...310..829L (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1901AnP...310..829L).
doi:10.1002/andp.19013100809 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fandp.19013100809).
Mandel, L.; Wolf, E. (1995). Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics (https://archive.org/det
ails/opticalcoherence0000mand). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-41711-2.
Mehra, J.; Rechenberg, H. (1982). The Historical Development of Quantum Theory. Vol. 1.
Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-0-387-90642-3.
Messiah, A. (1958). Quantum Mechanics. Temmer, G. G. (transl.). Wiley.
Michelson, V. A. (1888). "Theoretical essay on the distribution of energy in the spectra of
solids" (https://zenodo.org/record/1431187). Philosophical Magazine. Series 5. 25 (156):
425–435. doi:10.1080/14786448808628207 (https://doi.org/10.1080%2F147864488086282
07).
Mihalas, D.; Weibel-Mihalas, B. (1984). Foundations of Radiation Hydrodynamics. Oxford
University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-503437-0.
Milne, E. A. (1930). "Thermodynamics of the Stars". Handbuch der Astrophysik. 3 (1): 63–
255.
Mohr, P. J.; Taylor, B. N.; Newell, D. B. (2012). "CODATA Recommended Values of the
Fundamental Physical Constants: 2010" (http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Constants/codata.pdf)
(PDF). Reviews of Modern Physics. 84 (4): 1527–1605. arXiv:1203.5425 (https://arxiv.org/ab
s/1203.5425). Bibcode:2012RvMP...84.1527M (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012RvM
P...84.1527M). CiteSeerX 10.1.1.150.1225 (https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?
doi=10.1.1.150.1225). doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.84.1527 (https://doi.org/10.1103%2FRevM
odPhys.84.1527). S2CID 103378639 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:10337863
9).
Paltridge, G. W.; Platt, C. M. R. (1976). Radiative Processes in Meteorology and
Climatology (https://archive.org/details/radiativeprocess0000palt). Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-444-
41444-1.
Paschen, F. (1895). "Über Gesetzmäßigkeiten in den Spectren fester Körper und über ein
neue Bestimmung der Sonnentemperatur". Nachrichten von der Königlichen Gesellschaft
der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen (Mathematisch-Physikalische Klasse): 294–304.
Pauli, W. (1973). Enz, C. P. (ed.). Wave Mechanics. Margulies, S.; Lewis, H. R. (transl.). MIT
Press. ISBN 978-0-262-16050-6.
Planck, M. (1900a). "Über eine Verbesserung der Wien'schen Spectralgleichung" (https://arc
hive.org/stream/verhandlungende01goog#page/n212/mode/2up). Verhandlungen der
Deutschen Physikalischen Gesellschaft. 2: 202–204. Translated in ter Haar, D. (1967). "On
an Improvement of Wien's Equation for the Spectrum" (http://www.ffn.ub.es/luisnavarro/nuev
o_maletin/Planck%20%281900%29,%20Improvement%20of%20Wien%27s.pdf) (PDF). The
Old Quantum Theory. Pergamon Press. pp. 79–81. LCCN 66029628 (https://lccn.loc.gov/66
029628).



Planck, M. (1900b). "Zur Theorie des Gesetzes der Energieverteilung im Normalspectrum"
(https://archive.org/stream/verhandlungende01goog#page/n247/mode/2up). Verhandlungen
der Deutschen Physikalischen Gesellschaft. 2: 237–245. Translated in ter Haar, D. (1967).
"On the Theory of the Energy Distribution Law of the Normal Spectrum" (http://www.ffn.ub.e
s/luisnavarro/nuevo_maletin/Planck%20%281900%29,%20Distribution%20Law.pdf) (PDF).
The Old Quantum Theory. Pergamon Press. p. 82. LCCN 66029628 (https://lccn.loc.gov/66
029628).
Planck, M. (1900c). "Entropie und Temperatur strahlender Wärme" (https://zenodo.org/recor
d/1423979). Annalen der Physik. 306 (4): 719–737. Bibcode:1900AnP...306..719P (https://u
i.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1900AnP...306..719P). doi:10.1002/andp.19003060410 (https://do
i.org/10.1002%2Fandp.19003060410).
Planck, M. (1900d). "Über irreversible Strahlungsvorgänge" (https://zenodo.org/record/1423
973). Annalen der Physik. 306 (1): 69–122. Bibcode:1900AnP...306...69P (https://ui.adsabs.
harvard.edu/abs/1900AnP...306...69P). doi:10.1002/andp.19003060105 (https://doi.org/10.1
002%2Fandp.19003060105).
Planck, M. (1901). "Über das Gesetz der Energieverteilung im Normalspektrum" (https://doi.
org/10.1002%2Fandp.19013090310). Annalen der Physik. 4 (3): 553–563.
Bibcode:1901AnP...309..553P (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1901AnP...309..553P).
doi:10.1002/andp.19013090310 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fandp.19013090310).
Translated in Ando, K. "On the Law of Distribution of Energy in the Normal Spectrum" (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20111006162543/http://theochem.kuchem.kyoto-u.ac.jp/Ando/planc
k1901.pdf) (PDF). Archived from the original (http://theochem.kuchem.kyoto-u.ac.jp/Ando/pl
anck1901.pdf) (PDF) on 6 October 2011. Retrieved 13 October 2011.
Planck, M. (1906). Vorlesungen über die Theorie der Wärmestrahlung. Johann Ambrosius
Barth. LCCN 07004527 (https://lccn.loc.gov/07004527).
Planck, M. (1914). The Theory of Heat Radiation (https://archive.org/details/theoryofheatradi
00planrich). Translated by Masius, M. (2nd ed.). P. Blakiston's Son & Co. OL 7154661M (htt
ps://openlibrary.org/books/OL7154661M).
Planck, M. (1915). Eight Lectures on Theoretical Physics, delivered at Columbia University
in 1909 (https://www.gutenberg.org/files/39017/39017-pdf.pdf) (PDF). Translated by Wills, A.
P. New York: Columbia University Press. Retrieved 11 May 2020 – via Project Gutenberg.
Planck, M. (1943). "Zur Geschichte der Auffindung des physikalischen Wirkungsquantums".
Naturwissenschaften. 31 (14–15): 153–159. Bibcode:1943NW.....31..153P (https://ui.adsab
s.harvard.edu/abs/1943NW.....31..153P). doi:10.1007/BF01475738 (https://doi.org/10.100
7%2FBF01475738). S2CID 44899488 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4489948
8).
Rayleigh, Lord (1900). "LIII. Remarks upon the law of complete radiation" (https://zenodo.or
g/record/1430616). Philosophical Magazine. Series 5. 49 (301): 539–540.
doi:10.1080/14786440009463878 (https://doi.org/10.1080%2F14786440009463878).
Rayleigh, Lord (1905). "The Dynamical Theory of Gases and of Radiation" (https://zenodo.or
g/record/1429459). Nature. 72 (1855): 54–55. Bibcode:1905Natur..72...54R (https://ui.adsab
s.harvard.edu/abs/1905Natur..72...54R). doi:10.1038/072054c0 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F
072054c0). S2CID 4057048 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4057048).
Razavy, M. (2011). Heisenberg's Quantum Mechanics. World Scientific. ISBN 978-981-
4304-10-8.
Rubens, H.; Kurlbaum, F. (1900a). "Über die Emission langer Wellen durch den schwarzen
Körper". Verhandlungen der Deutschen Physikalischen Gesellschaft. 2: 181.



Rubens, H.; Kurlbaum, F. (1900b). "Über die Emission langwelliger Wärmestrahlen durch
den schwarzen Körper bei verschiedenen Temperaturen". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich
Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin: 929–941. Translated in Rubens, H.;
Kurlbaum, F. (1901). "On the heat-radiation of long wave-length emitted by black bodies at
different temperatures" (https://doi.org/10.1086%2F140874). The Astrophysical Journal. 14:
335–348. Bibcode:1901ApJ....14..335R (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1901ApJ....14..3
35R). doi:10.1086/140874 (https://doi.org/10.1086%2F140874).
Rybicki, G. B.; Lightman, A. P. (1979). Radiative Processes in Astrophysics (https://books.go
ogle.com/books?id=LtdEjNABMlsC). John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-82759-7.
Sharkov, E. A. (2003). "Black-body radiation" (http://www.iki.rssi.ru/asp/pub_sha1/Sharch06.
pdf) (PDF). Passive Microwave Remote Sensing of the Earth. Springer. ISBN 978-3-540-
43946-2.
Schiff, L. I. (1949). Quantum Mechanics. McGraw-Hill.
Schirrmacher, A. (2001). Experimenting theory: the proofs of Kirchhoff's radiation law before
and after Planck. Münchner Zentrum für Wissenschafts und Technikgeschichte.
Schwinger, J. (2001). Englert, B.-G. (ed.). Quantum Mechanics: Symbolism of Atomic
Measurements. Springer. ISBN 978-3-540-41408-7.
Scully, M. O.; Zubairy, M. S. (1997). Quantum Optics. Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-43458-4.
Siegel, D. M. (1976). "Balfour Stewart and Gustav Robert Kirchhoff: two independent
approaches to "Kirchhoff's radiation law" ". Isis. 67 (4): 565–600. doi:10.1086/351669 (http
s://doi.org/10.1086%2F351669). PMID 794025 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/794025).
S2CID 37368520 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:37368520).
Siegel, R.; Howell, J. R. (2002). Thermal Radiation Heat Transfer, Volume 1 (https://books.g
oogle.com/books?id=O389yQ0-fecC&pg=PA25) (4th ed.). Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-
56032-839-1.
Sommerfeld, A. (1923). Atomic Structure and Spectral Lines (https://books.google.com/book
s?id=u1UmAAAAMAAJ). Brose, H. L. (transl.) (from 3rd German ed.). Methuen.
Stehle, P. (1994). Order, Chaos, Order. The Transition from Classical to Quantum Physics (h
ttps://archive.org/details/orderchaosordert0000steh). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-
19-507513-7.
Stewart, B. (1858). "An account of some experiments on radiant heat" (https://zenodo.org/re
cord/2137146). Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. 22: 1–20.
doi:10.1017/S0080456800031288 (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0080456800031288).
S2CID 122316368 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:122316368).
ter Haar, D. (1967). The Old Quantum Theory (https://archive.org/details/oldquantumtheory0
000haar). Pergamon Press. LCCN 66-029628 (https://lccn.loc.gov/66-029628).
Thornton, S. T.; Rex, A. F. (2002). Modern Physics. Thomson Learning. ISBN 978-0-03-
006049-6.
Tisza, L. (1966). Generalized Thermodynamics. MIT Press.
Tommasini, D.; Ferrando, F.; Michinel, H.; Seco, M. (2008). "Detecting photon-photon
scattering in vacuum at exawatt lasers". Physical Review A. 77 (1): 042101. arXiv:quant-
ph/0703076 (https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0703076). Bibcode:2008PhRvA..77a2101M (http
s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2008PhRvA..77a2101M). doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.77.012101
(https://doi.org/10.1103%2FPhysRevA.77.012101).
Tyndall, J. (1865a). "Über leuchtende und dunkle Strahlung" (https://zenodo.org/record/1423
698). Annalen der Physik und Chemie. 200 (1): 36–53. Bibcode:1865AnP...200...36T (http
s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1865AnP...200...36T). doi:10.1002/andp.18652000103 (http
s://doi.org/10.1002%2Fandp.18652000103).
Tyndall, J. (1865b). Heat considered as a Mode of Motion (https://archive.org/details/heatco
nsideredas00tyndrich). D. Appleton & Company.



Wien, W. (1896). "Über die Energievertheilung im Emissionsspectrum eines schwarzen
Körpers" (https://zenodo.org/record/1423916). Annalen der Physik und Chemie. 294 (8):
662–669. Bibcode:1896AnP...294..662W (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1896AnP...294..
662W). doi:10.1002/andp.18962940803 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fandp.18962940803).
Wilson, A. H. (1957). Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics (https://archive.org/details/
thermodynamicsst0000wils). Cambridge University Press.

External links
Summary of Radiation (http://topex.ucsd.edu/rs/radiation.pdf)
Radiation of a Blackbody (http://www.vias.org/simulations/simusoft_blackbody.html) –
interactive simulation to play with Planck's law
Scienceworld entry on Planck's Law (http://scienceworld.wolfram.com/physics/PlanckLaw.ht
ml)

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Planck%27s_law&oldid=1246834468"