S TELLAR  E VOLUTION  -  C YCLES  OF  F ORMATION  AND  DE STRUCTION 
 B ROWN  D WARFS  &  L OW  M ASS  S TARS:  

 Illustration  (Chandra) 

 Brown  Dwarfs  in  Orion  (Hubble) 

 If  a  protostar  forms  with  a  mass  less  than  0.08  solar  masses,  its  internal 
 temperature  never  becomes  high  enough  for  thermonuclear  fusion  to  begin.  This 
 “failed”  star  is  called  a  brown  dwarf,  halfway  between  a  planet  (like  Jupiter)  and  a 
 star.  A  star  shines  because  of  the  thermonuclear  reactions  in  its  core,  which 
 release  enormous  amounts  of  energy  by  fusing  hydrogen  into  helium.  For  the 
 fusion  reactions  to  occur,  though,  the  temperature  in  the  star's  core  must  reach  at 
 least  three  million  K.  Because  core  temperature  rises  with  gravitational  pressure, 
 the  star  must  have  a  minimum  mass:  about  75  times  the  mass  of  the  planet 
 Jupiter,  or  approximately  8  percent  of  the  mass  of  the  Sun.  A  brown  dwarf  does 
 not  have  enough  mass;  it  is  heavier  than  a  gas  giant  planet  but  not  quite  massive 
 enough  to  be  a  star.  Brown  dwarfs  still  emit  energy,  mostly  in  the  infrared,  due  to 
 the  potential  energy  of  collapse  converted  into  kinetic  energy.  There  is  enough 
 energy  from  the  collapse  to  cause  the  brown  dwarf  to  shine  for  more  than  ~15 
 million  years.  Brown  dwarfs  eventual  radiate  all  their  heat  into  space.  The 
 composite  Hubble  image  shows  the  bright  Trapezium  stars  (optical)  within  the 



 Orion  Nebula  combined  with  an  infrared  image  that  shows  a  swarm  of  brown 
 dwarfs. 

 Proxima  Centauri  (Chandra) 

 All  through  the  long  life  of  a  low  mass  star,  the  relentless  compression  of  gravity 
 is  balanced  by  the  outward  pressure  from  the  nuclear  fusion  reactions  in  the 
 core.  Eventually,  the  hydrogen  nuclei  in  the  core  is  all  converted  to  helium  nuclei 
 and  the  nuclear  reactions  stop.  No  further  evolution  takes  place  in  stars  with  less 
 than  0.8  solar  masses.  The  time  it  takes  for  low  mass  stars  to  use  up  all  their 
 hydrogen  fuel  is  longer  than  the  current  age  of  the  universe  (about  14  billion 
 years).  These  extremely  low  mass  stars  are  called  red  dwarfs,  and  they  are 
 located  on  the  lower  right  corner  of  the  main  sequence  on  the  H-R  Diagram. 
 Proxima  Centauri ,  the  nearest  star  to  the  Sun,  is  a  red  dwarf  star.